# Table of Contents

* [Introduction](#introduction)
* [Why?](#why)
* [The March of Decentralization](#the-march-of-decentralization)
* [An Operating System for the United States](#an-operating-system-for-the-united-states)
* [An Image Problem](#an-image-problem)
* [Massive Collaboration](#massive-collaboration)
* [A New System](#a-new-system)
* [Bibliography](#bibliography)

# Introduction

**Update 1/11/24**

Once again I find myself giving this a quick tune up as it continues to have legs in various conversations.

I appologize for what is now a bit of a rambling ReadMe file. In the name of the "version control" aspect of this project, I've decided to keep this stream of updates intact. Please keep reading for a sense of the project and its progression over time.

If you're here simply to dig in as a sample of my writing, you can jump right to the first chapter by clicking on "Why?" in the left menu.

Thanks for taking a look!

Best,

Adam

**Update 4/21/23**

Much to my surprise, I've got reasons to pass this link around again. So, here's some quick context:

* This was essentially a law school "thesis" project because I got my JD for academic reasons, not to practice. I kept working on it for a while after that in different forms. Check out the branch labeled "Southwestern" something that reads much more like a philosophy paper. That's from first semester. Master branch is the second semester onward. I have not read it since then. I'm sure my thinking on most of it has evolved.
* I also converted it for some blog content [here.](https://medium.com/zengineering-podcast/crowdsourcing-democracy-government-in-a-decentralized-world-part-one-deal-with-it-e4755940a360)
* Where I was going, but did not really get before I ran out of time, was toward an idea that we could build a system of keeping our laws that would allow github/stack overflow style civic engagement. (And possibly policies.)
  * Optimize for machine readability of legal code.
  * Git-like version control & collaboration (what if a bill had to be drafted by a % of consitutency, instead of 5 junior staffers?)
  * Collaborator notifications (Keep tabs on bullshit last minute edits to bills.)
  * Open Data Management (Maybe Blockchain here?)
  * Handling ID & Credentials (Maybe Blockchain here?)
* If you're here now you might also like this [whitepaper on blockchain dispute resolution](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1318klGEYL4g02VudL-C-BCnvpKujTnbF/view). 👈 This is the project that stole my attention from completing the above.

**Original Readme: 11/17/15**

**On Gitbook?** Cool. Keep reading.

**On GitHub?:** Skip down for "readme" kinda stuff.

Want to go to GitBook?: [Here you go!](https://juris.gitbook.io/crowdsourcing-democracy/)

Welcome to the repository for my exploration of government and the law in the age of digital connectivity and collaboration, when software is quickly taking over the world.

I'm Adam. I set this up. I'm working on it ongoing as I have time. Other people might be too, any time you check in it might be different. First draft is due in a month. At this point, if you're here you're a friend, classmate, family member or professor. Thank you for taking a look!

What you see in front of you is already an example of the tools I'll be writing about and their implications for society, and systems of government.

This project will take shape using the same tools that programmers use to coordinate and collaborate while working on software that is text based and both hieracrchical and non-linear at the same time (just like legal documents, and laws.) As of now GitBooks is mostly a layer for sharing and public comments.

If you're here on a computer you can comment by clicking on the little "+" icon to the right of any section. (Right now it's a number because I have some comments. Try clicking the number. ->

If you want to make changes, that's happening via GitHub, which will actually be in the paper later under in the "Massive Collaboration" chapter. If you want to dig in that info is below.

I'm working continually, so what you see here is what I've got so far. Interested, dig in, reach out, I'll help you get rolling as a contributor. You should be able to comment with thoughts or questions by clicking the little plus that comes up when you mouse over any given section.

If you've got a few minutes the video below is the thing that got me going down this road to begin with. I retread some of Shirky's stuff in the paper so far, but I'm trying to end with at least the start for an actual proposed system by which to deploy this into lawmaking, and a discussion of its merits. I'll keep putting other cool links down here as I bump into them.

[Clay Shirky on how the Internet will Transform Government](https://www.ted.com/talks/clay\_shirky\_how\_the\_internet\_will\_one\_day\_transform\_government?language=en)

\~ Adam

**DO YOU ALREADY USE GITHUB? READ BELOW:**

Gitbook is synced with [this Github Repo.](https://github.com/thekerp/Crowdsourcing-Democracy)

Anything merged with the master ends up here on GitBook where I send people to read and comment as someone likely first did to you. Set up a GitBook account to interact with public comments. You can also tie that to your GitHub account quite nicely.

GitBook pulls its structure for the Table of Contents from the SUMMARY.md

This document right here is README.md

Each "Section" is a new .md file, titled and pointed to in SUMMARY.md

**Try not to break that structure up.** In my experience so far it breaks the Gitbook sync, and thus the public comment system.

I think that's it.

Fork on brave souls.

\~ Still Adam


# Why?

My youngest sister has always had a cell phone (at least for emergency purposes.) She’s never been on a blind date, they're not really a thing anymore, Facebook and a host of online dating options have seen to that. She never had to awkwardly call and first talk to the mother of a prospective date for a school dance. She also, by now, has graduated college, gotten a good job, and moved to a major city. She is a full fledged part of adult society, a voter, and as long as she's cared to she's been able to download any song she wanted to and take it with her. Her generation communicates in a way that is a full on paradigm shift away from the way mine did at her age, and she’s only ten years younger than I am. And the way I communicate is another paradigm shift from that of my parents. Soon a generation will grow up with widespread VR, and everyone my age will look at them with confusion. As the momentum of Moore’s law holds, it is clear that humankind is possessed of an inherent motivation to devote toward communication substantial amounts of our additional capacity to innovate. From broadcast radio and sound recordings, to blogs, podcasts, social media, and smartphones, we have a consistent pattern of making communication easier, faster, more efficient, and certainly within American legal tradition, better protected.

As this trend has progressed communication has also grown increasingly decentralized. Where there were once four major broadcast networks, and one postal service, there are now hundreds of cable channels, and emails and texts go directly person to person at the speed of light. On the Internet the diffusion is even more rapid as Tweets and Facebook updates, links and videos shared fly around at astounding rates, often providing information wholly unsolicited but floated into the ether nonetheless. It is easier than ever to find the information you are looking for, and if you are so inclined, do something with it. Uber has decentralized and democratized (to a degree) the taxicab business. AirBnB has democratized and decentralized the vacation rental business. And in the most high profile of bubbles popped, and defused to the people, the music business was undermined by Napster and its kin.

I return to the story of the generation of my sister. They're grown ups now. They're voters. What will they make of the processes of government they inherited? Before we can consider the impact of these communication and collaboration technologies on the government itself, but we must begin with a first prong: the expectations of the people. For their expectations, and the government's ability to meet them, will surely impact their respect for, and engagement with any system of governance.

So, to the title of the chapter. “Why?” Why is this an important conversation. The answer comes easily with a look at the slow pace of innovation in the realm of government and the law. To some degree such sluggishness is an important part of any system that requires considered thought regarding scenarios, outcomes, applications of the law, and the implications of changes to a system of governance. But this sloth of innovation is also a failure to keep with the times, and as many a legal philosopher has been quick to point out: a system of law, or of government, that does not seem to adapt to the needs of the people is inadequate and less than ideal. And a system lacking the respect of the people to be governed is even less ideal. This has not only to do with the content of the laws, and the just application of those laws in the eyes of the governed, but is also a matter of the trust in the system itself. This is trust in the very mechanisms by which the system is administered and by which the people engage. As technology advances, attention spans grow shorter, and public intolerance for inefficiency grows, it is inevitable that a system that appears woefully behind the times, archaic and slow, will lose the respect of the governed. Today we find ourselves with a system of government typified at the highest levels by inability to cooperate. Meanwhile modern technologies put into the hands of the general public the capacity for massive cooperation. Cooperation that is steadily providing solutions to increasingly complicated problems. Wi. thout the government.

From here we must ask how effective at governing its people a system can be that lacks the respect of the governed. For all the attempt to present the dilemmas and importance of the discussion in a high-brow manner the problem can simply be boiled down into one question posed to me by numerous members of younger generations: “I can use my phone to vote for American Idol, why do I have to go through so much crap to vote for president?” This question is presented often in the context of my question, "why didn't you vote?" As I will explore in later sections, participation is of the utmost importance in even the minimally decentralized system that our democracy represents. Our system is already shedding voters to inconvenience, and that makes a difference.

This scenario brings to mind the kind of paradigm shift that Napster foisted upon the music industry. Instead of embracing new technologies at the cost of the loss of their stranglehold on means of distribution, the record labels increased the pressure against easier access to their wares, and in response, armed with Napster’s decentralized network of kids willing to share the files they had ripped, the people rose up against the labels, and not only shook that stranglehold, but took the labels to the mat, and rolled over on top of them. The measurement of discontent used to be a matter of slowing sales, or decreased interest in a topic. In the modern world of connection and collaboration systems don't wane, they get replaced, sometimes before the reigning institution knows what's happening.

All of this is to say that the current US government is fast moving toward a crossroads, one at which I see abrupt shifts in the expectations of the people, their regard for the system and their ability to not just do something about it, but potentially supersede the entirety of the system itself.

Once again I return the question put to me about American Idol. Ultimately, the answer to why they have to cart themselves to a booth to vote is simply, “because the Government moves slowly.” For coming generations, who have never been without Uber, this will not be an acceptable answer, and they will not tolerate the inefficiencies and ineffectiveness. In more optimistic scenarios they will mobilize to change the system. Darker scenarios make it all the way to civil war. I am optimistic, and there are myriad examples, some of which I will discuss below, that lend credence to this optimism. Given the tools, I believe that people are inclined toward engagement and problem solving. As applied to the law it is possible to build tools, and modes of engagement with government and lawmaking that bring people closer to build a more perfect union instead of pushing them apart as it sometimes seems the Internet echo chamber might. So I first undertake a discussion of the implications of technologies that have at their core the goal of allowing greater cooperation and mass involvement in problem solving, and both the practical and philosophical implications of the application of those technologies to lawmaking and government. Ultimately I hope to invite input and modification of these theories via the very technologies I will discuss. I hope only to lay down the foundation starting an inevitably vast conversation of how we might crowdsource the government.

1. If it didn’t difference voter ID laws, and other efforts to impede the ability to vote, as a strategy to carry a district, wouldn’t be a point of contention. When it comes down to it, there are factions trying to keep people from voting, at a time when the march of communication is toward more and more people are being given a voice.

# The March of Decentralization

## Resistance is Futile: The March of Decentralization

#### Technology&#x20;

When I was in high school we weren't allowed to use calculators on math tests. If we asked why not the answer was "because you won't always have a calculator." As I type this I currently have no fewer than three calculators within arms reach, two on my person. If I were willing to ask someone for a hand I could have access to hundreds of calculators without leaving the air conditioning of this coffee shop. When we say "technology" we tend to think of the things it produces, but to have a conversation about the change technology has and will cause in places like culture, society, and government we should start with the notion that technology is not about physical stuff. Technology is a force. Math was tricky, so we made a device to handle it for us. Then we made sure that access to that tool was widespread enough that, quite literally, haven't had to do long division by hand or in my head, in nearly twenty years. Technology is not the calculator, the calculator is just a tool that embodies the the solution to a problem. Technological progress provided that tool. Technological progress is rooted in a base instinct to solve problems, to grow. This instinct isn't even limited to humans. It isn't a product of intelligence, it is a product of life. In order to think about what technological innovation will mean for the world, for people, for government we have to treat technological progress like we treat the drive to keep living. It isn't going anywhere. As "The Borg" of Star Trek fame would say, "resistance is futile." So what do we do? Lucky for us, technology answers that question too, but only if we stop thinking of it as stuff, and instead think of it as a way of thinking.

Technology as a force goes hand in hand with another requisite notion we will grapple with as this discussion progresses: at every level of social development, and thus development of government and systems of law, technology has had a impact. In a sense society, government and legal development is itself technology. It is resoundingly safe to say that the progression of technology, and social order of any sort have gone hand in hand. As Father John Culkin, in a article about the work of renowned philosopher of communication theory Marshall McLuhan, so effectively put it, “We shape our tools and thereafter our tools shape us.” And so the notion of technology is about stuff in the sense that it does create calculators, and we use those calculators to further technological progress, building better calulators. Or in the cases I will discuss below, finding better ways to fortify the distribution of calculators such that I never have to do long division. (Phew)

So if it isn't stuff, what is technology as a force? Well, let's get real book report on it and check with a dictionary. Which, incidentally, I have the same scale of acess to at this moment that I do a calculator. “Technology” is derived from the Greek 'tekhnologia', its roots being 'tekhnē,' meaning art, or craft, and 'logia' denoting the study of that craft. Today, because of the consistent development of humankind, “technology” has taken on an association with gadgets and tools, but the baseline concept is that of "systematic treatment.” Technology, it turns out is not a thing, but a practice. The extent to which it is a "piece of technology" of any sort is, at its core, the result of systemic problem solving. As we move forward we must remember that even language itself is technology, communiation technology: the creation of a system of sounds correlated with ideas. The systematic treatment of those sounds such that they are imbued with meaning as representation of ideas is systematic problem solving, technology. Writing is the systemic application of symbols to those sounds, gaining humankind the ability to record ideas, and to pass those ideas on to other people.

Remembering this intertwined relationship of communication as technology, and technology that facilitates communication and in turn facilitates further developments in both, is important as we progress. As complex societies and thus systems of law, have evolved, they have done so both in response to, and facilitated by, technological advancement. They are component parts of systems that have evolved over time, moving, by the broader view, toward systems of greater and greater refinement. All these systems are the output of systemic problem solving at increasing levels of complexity. The march of technological innovation and the evolution of systems of order seem to be a sort of fundamental force. Be it gravity, or the cooperation of bees and ants, this force is an expression of the tendency toward order exhibited at all levels of the universe.

\[Philosophical Aside] While personally I tend toward a positivist view of law, I will grant the natural law theorists the fact that any system chased to its fundamental components seems to end with unidentifiable forces. I disagree with those philosophers that would call this force "morals." In my estimation the concept of 'morals' used in explanations of "natural law" is merely a system by which complicated organisms sense and discuss the complex system that is perception and emotion. A 'moral' only has value insofar as it contributes to communication in the effort to pursue harmony. I hope to continue this abstract discussion in further sections. \[/philosophizing]

#### Decentralized Systems Of Communication

Before we begin practical or philosophical exploration of the implications of modern decentralization of technology it is important to establish a baseline understanding of those technologies, their evolution, and more broadly the nature of a decentralized system. The best place to start is perhaps with the antithesis: a centralized system. In each case it will be valuable to look at baseline version of specific technologies I’ve mentioned above, as well as their broader function in the march toward decentralization. Compared to the complications of legal and interpersonal communication dynamics, computer networks are simple. Yet, for their simplicity, they still represent that core interactions that make up all forms of communication: ideas, or "data," sent back and forth. And in computer systems we are able to more clearly see the different arrangements of links and permissions through which information is passed. Those links and permissions are simple in comparison to the complexity of language, etiquette, or the law. yet, in the end they are still all nothing more than systems of parameters. The parameters upon which any party taking part in said communication has agreed, or simply been taught for the sake of facilitating higher orders of complexity in communication. Higher orders of complexity in communication needed primarily to fascilitate higher level problem solving.

#### Centralized Systems

A “centralized” system is one in which all power is constrained to a central hub. Think of spokes on a wheel. Whether the function is communication, computation, or government, every decision is made by the central hub. Each spoke of the wheel, no matter how many there are, must make contact with the master hub, and they are unable to talk to one another directly. Without contact with the main hub the component at the end of that spoke is essentially inert, it has no computational capacity, and does not contain any means of performing functions.

In the computing sense I’ve just described a system that can be visualized by imagining a group of terminals consisting of screens and keyboards. Every terminal is connected to the main hub, and every piece of information input via the keyboard is sent back to the main hub. Similarly, every piece of information displayed on the screen is sent directly from the main hub to that screen. There is no processing and no computation taking place at the terminal itself, it is simply a window into the operation of the master hub through which we can deliver commands. This was the initial state of mass computing. The physical devices were such that a computer the complexity of which I now wear on my wrist filled a room with wires and tubes. A centralized system was the only hope to give anyone access to that computing power.

Adding a layer of complexity to expand the notion of a centralized system to systems of authority, or power, the terminal referenced above is powerless. It is capable only of sending and receiving information. It has access to the main hub, but is itself possessed of no authority to make decisions, and is not connected to other terminals. Extrapolating this notion of authority to a centralized system of government, we have monarchy. A system of government in which all political power, all power to make laws, to see to their disposition, and ultimately govern the people, is centralized in one seat, that of the king, emperor, or the like. Removing notions of higher order complexity — that is, the fact the people can talk to one another, as terminals in a centralized system cannot — as far as the structure of monarchy as a system of government is concerned, the people are powerless. Similar to the evolution of systems of computing, early in the evolution of human society monarchy was effective, if not necessary. In essence, with the fresh notion of large scale social order, a central hub of authority, as in computing, is a natural first development, whether within a family, or an empire.

#### Decentralized Systems

A decentralized system is one in which power is diffused from the central hub to a series of intermediate hubs. Decision making, or computational load on the central hub is decreased by offloading of tasks to these intermediate hubs. Those intermediate stations are given the power and ability to perform certain functions, or a subset of functions without checking in with the main hub. Here we can envision the spokes of the wheels imaged earlier, multiplied. Now we have a system of multiple wheels, the hub of each connected back to the master hub. That master hub is aware of, and controls the operation of those intermediate hubs, which in turn control the terminals. Still the terminals do not talk to one another, and now they do not talk directly to the central hub, unless passing through an intermediate hub.

In the world of computers such systems developed as we were able to shrink the room filling computer mentioned above, while maintaining the same computational capacity. Smaller systems meant the ability to have more of them, in more locations, each with the same computing power as the old central hub. At the same time, the space occupied by the old central hub was now filled with these smaller systems, multiplying the computation power of that central hub. This central hub now had the power to work on exponentially more complex computations, while also paying attention to the distribution of tasks to intermediate stations, those controlling the terminals.

To again jump to the more complex application of this decentralized communication paradigm to systems of power: authority now rests with the intermediate hubs, and their mutual communication through the central hub. All authority regarding the functions of a terminal is held by the intermediate hub, and all authority regarding functions of the intermediate hubs as a network is held by the central hub. System-wide the terminals are still not talking to one another directly, and have no authority.

The above might sound familiar. The visual evoked is that of a web, which is another term used for the Internet. The Internet is the most readily available, and widely know example of a decentralized system of communication. For the ease of the explanation above I’ve left the central hub in play, but in reality, a decentralized system no longer requires a master hub, and the Internet has none. The function of the central hub is diffused across all intermediate hubs by the introduction of what is, in essence, social order. A system of communication. The central innovation of the internet was not the networking or even computational capacity, but software that allowed the intermediate hubs to coordinate their behavior. As long as those intermediate hubs report to one another the tasks that formerly required the coordination of a central authority, the need for that central authority can be fully dispersed to those intermediate hubs. In essence, the core innovation that gave birth to "the Internet" with an uppercase "I," was governance software, a system of rules, distributed to, and followed by, every intermediate hub.

The governance software, as rudimentary as it is, may be compared to, for example, the United States Code, and its underlying Constitution. At its core a set of laws for the function of society is absolutely no different than the protocols behind the Internet. The U.S. Code is a set of rules for the cooperation of a massively complicated system of communication and behavior. As you may have been able to track, the United States’ system of government, that which we call "democracy," (although actually a democratic republic,) is a decentralized system. The federal government is at the center, possessing authority over the government of the states the intermediate hubs. Primarily governed by the authority of the states (day-to-day at least) are the people. Naturally the intricacies of the system are more complicated than this, but at its core, and certainly as envisioned by the Founding Fathers, it is a decentralized system of government. Or, as Benjamin Franklin famously said “A Republic… if you can keep it.” Later I will undertake a deeper inspection of US “democracy” but for current purposes it is important merely as an example of a decentralized system. It is a system born of the Founding Fathers’ desire to build from the foundation before them a more perfect system of governing a people than the monarchy they had so recently bucked.

As evidenced by its persistence, that system devised by the Founding Fathers of the United States has been remarkably effective to date. Certainly a great deal of this might be attributed to the decentralized nature of the system. Decentralized systems are inherently particularly robust. The Internet itself was originaly developed expressly to be truly decentralized in order to protect the information stored therein: nuclear launch codes, and other “top secret” information essential to the function of the US government. The desire at its inception was that the internet should provide a system by which important information, and the communication of that information, would be stable and accessible even in the event that one or even multiple intermediate hubs were literally, physically, destroyed via nuclear attack. But this decentralization also opened up communication possibilities, and expansion of computing power. The establishment of a protocol by which information is shared from hub to hub has allowed those networks to handle increasingly vast quantities of communication, and in turn to solve increasingly complex problems. In the realm of government the diffusion of a degree of power to govern and adapt the rules of government away from a central authority and toward the people is similarly robust, and as I hope to explore further below, results in more effectively establishing the balance between the human desire to be free in our thoughts and actions and the requirement that we sacrifice a measure of freedom in the name of common cooperation.

#### Distributed Systems

Decentralization is not the endpoint in the evolution of systems of computing, nor communication. We have, only in the last decade, begun to encounter systems of communication that a what one might call purely decentralized. That is, completely and fully without intermediate hubs. Here there is no wheel to imagine, only spokes, a system of points, with all points able to communicate with any of the other points. All of these points are able to perform all of the necessary functions related to that network, and the network as a whole is able to keep track of the functions of all of the points. There are no central or intermediate hubs.

If we follow evolution in the realm of computing the decentralization has continued along a predictable path. With computers continuing to shrink it only made sense to now move some of the computational capacity out to the terminals, to let it happen right there where the screen and the input devices are located, and provide that the results of these computations should be reported back to the network. It took place piecemeal as PCs and the internet proliferated, but this progression has not slowed. We continue to build processing power into the devices around us. We use them every day: computers, phones, watches, houses, and we continue to network those devices together. Here it is important to realize that by “network” we mean not only to physically (or wirelessly as it were) connect these devices, but also write the software by which the communication of these devices is governed. This software is itself decentralized, and in some very specific cases I will discuss, fully distributed.

It is only within the last decade that we have crossed the important threshold to the possibility of truly distributed computing. Now the personal device in the possession of each of us has the computing power to, by itself, solve problems that extend well beyond the needs of the average person. Not only does everyone who owns a smartphone hold in their pocket the equivalent computing power of the old room-sized computers, but they have computing power to spare, and programers and scholars are already able to put that power to work, and have been on some level for years. I took part in an early example of how such a system can be harnessed. At fourteen or fifteen years old I downloaded a client to take part in an initiative known as The Great Internet Mersenne Prime Search, (G.I.M.P.S.). This was any early distributed computation effort started in 1996 intended to verify increasingly higher primer numbers. To take part, a user would download a small program onto their computer that would run in the background using only a fraction of the computing capacity of that personal system. A fraction small enough that it would rarely even cause a noticeable change running everyday programs. That fractional amount of computing power was used to process equations, and report the findings back to the rest of the group of systems running the software. With no central hub, this network of computers at one point was estimated to be the largest super computer in the world, by distributing computing tasks, in fractional increments, to millions of users.

GIMPS is cute, but it's nerd stuff. How about an example of a distributed system that most will recognize: Napster, sort of. Napster relied on a central server, which didn’t save files, but which coordinated a master database of files available across the distributed network. Killing this server was how it was eventually shut down, revealing the weakness of even that minimal degree of centralization versus the alternative. Napster’s progeny plugged this hole. Services such as Limewire and Kazaa were fully decentralized, distributed, as BitTorrent is today. Every computer running a BitTorrent client, when a torrent request is initiated, checks, at the speed of light, every other system in the world also running a client. From there that client is able to ask for the file it seeks, and begin receiving the data that comprises that file from all of the other clients with a version of that file at once, at revolutionary speed. The only bottleneck becomes the physical speed at which we can move electrons through a cable, or radio waves through the air. Another example from the headlines is Bitcoin. It is often pitched as a “decentralized” form of currency, as it doesn’t rely on major banks or a national treasury to maintain stability and functionality. In that sense it is decentralized, but truly it is a distributed system of currency. Similar to GIMPS, or BitTorrent, BitCoin derives its stability and “security” from its distribution. There is no central hub to destroy or otherwise manipulate. The master registry of all transactions taking place with BitCoin exist at once on all systems taking part in the “mining” of BitCoin. At this point wiping out the Bitcoin network would require the simultaneous destrcution of hundreds of thousands, if not millions of computers at once.

When it comes to the security of a fully decentralized system robust falls short as a descriptor. A decentralized system, such as the Internet, is difficult to physically destroy because there are thousands of hubs. A fully decentralized system, such as BitTorrent is borderline impossible to pick apart. (The most limiting factor is the infrastructure, which is as secure as the Internet itself.) The security derives from an important facet of decentralization which I have already discussed. As computing power has diffused, and computing tasks have been passed down to smaller, more specifically able devices, along with them has gone the aforementioned rules of governance. The brilliance of BitTorrent, just like the brilliance of the Internet before it, is not in the increased computing power, but in the protocol that was proliferated to facilitate communication between devices. In this sense BitTorrent is technology like language is technology: systematic agreement on a standard of communication. That communication facilitated by advancement in physical technology, be they books or computers. Coupled with the proliferation of computing power, we’ve taken a system that could involve many people working at terminals, through a central hub, and diffused that computing power to, literally, billions of devices instead united by common rules of device to device communication. Another way to say this is that each device, to some extent, has a full copy of everything the communication system needs to persist. By eliminating the central hubs we eliminate the points where the system could be shut down with the flip of a switch. Like human development of language, this sort of progression is hard to put back in back in the box.

Let's continue my pattern, and take a step backward to greater abstraction. What of authority in a distributed system? Here there is no central hub so there is no direct authority in the sense of a gatekeeper. There is no entity exerting authority to the extent that information or ideas are controlled, or rules are proliferated. The physical system itself does not provide a hierarchy of control and authority. In theory every device on a distributed network is its own master. In theory. In reality they are constrained by the protocols and parameters that allow the system to function. In some sense this means that there is centralized authority embodied in the rules of the system itself. But physically, there is no master. If a BitTorrent client does not adhere to certain communication protocol it is unable to avail itself of the distributed network. This must constitute some form of authority, but more one that is inherent to the system, than possessed by any one entity. And BitTorrent is the perfect example, as there are few standards beyond those I’ve just outlined, and lawless BitTorrent is most widely known for its use in the piracy of intellectual property.

At this point, unlike as in previous sections, the discussion of distributed systems and government gets hazy, theoretical, and, well, fun. Executed on a large scale the increase in complexity from one form of government, to the next and more decentralized form is massive. To date there are few examples in the history of humankind of systems of government without at least some form of vaguely centralized authority. At least, nothing on a large scale. At the tribal level there are examples of effective fully distributed forms of governance wherein there is no clear cut leader, but in human history it seems to be centralization that first allowed us to progress toward the possibility of motion once again in the direction of decentralization. Looking further, to the animal kingdom, even the closest we can find to what seem to be a distributed system of communication, that between ants and bees, communities built on communication that borders on apparent telepathy, still often have a center of authority in their queen. (Admittedly I know very little about these power structures. Who's up to write the "Ants and Bees" chapter?) But this does not leave the inquiry moot, for the march of systems of technology and communication among humans continues toward further distribution, and further decentralization. As we strive, driven by the universal imperative that I have called technology, toward a more perfect coordinated system of communication, we will need to adapt the systems we have used to govern our behavior. As I referenced at the outset, younger generations of those to be governed and take part in the government already grumble at its failures to provide the transparency, and cooperation, they see in the technology surrounding them.

# An Operating System for the United States

#### Decentralization in Real World Government

To move forward with an exploration of the impact and implication of the above it will be of value to take steps backward in our inquiry. It is of importance to understand the apparent progression of communication and cooperation toward the distributed system I outline above, but at this point that it will be of great value to step back and look at systems of government and law that are in place today in lieu of a sprawling brainstorm regarding the possibilities of a distributed government. The previous sections are of greater importance to the understanding of systems of communication, and what seems to be the inherent progression toward diffusion of authority. When we endeavor to discuss the implications of those changes on government it will be a greater value to begin (as I have already begun to some extent above) from exploration of the degree to which we have already achieved a decentralized system of government. This discussion will make tangible the implications of further decentralization, as well as the conversation about the virtues and difficulties of such progression.

The “democracy” of the United States sprung from the revolt of the American English colonies. As colonies of England they were subject to the rule of a monarch (or oligarchy, as it were), and rose in rebellion, discontent with a distant ruler whose decisions were, in their view, increasingly alien to life in the colonies, an ocean away from the seat of power. This alienation is a historical manifestation of one of the core weaknesses of a centralized system. Both in government, and computing, great geographic distances strain a centralized system. At great distances the connection to the main hub becomes increasingly tenuous. Looked at with our previous view to the master imperative of problem solving, this strain on the system is a matter of both infrastructure, and the ability of the central hub to understand the problems to be solved. In computing it becomes more bluntly a problem of infrastructure. Distances cause delays in communication, and those delays hold up problem solving. A dumb terminal, connected to a central hub, begins to fail if the terminal is too far from the seat of computing. In essence the problem is no different from a monarch an ocean away unable to understand the struggles of his subjects outside of his line of sight (or effective reporting.) In both cases there is an inefficiency in communication. That inefficiency results in failures of problem solving, whether to respond to complaints of unfair taxes, or to return the answer to a mathematical function faster than could have been calculated on paper. Those failures in communication, and thus in problem solving, result in discontent in the user or in the governed. In both cases decentralization ca provide the solution. By diffusing a certain amount of authority to the governed, better communication is facilitated, and the system is better equipped to maintain its integrity at greater degrees of complexity and in the case of an empire, distance.

Having cast off the rule of the British Monarchy the Founding Fathers of the United States set out to create what they would call, in the preamble to the Constitution, “a more perfect union.” They were well aware that the form of government that came before them had first driven their forebearers to leave England, and had further driven their generation to revolt. Accordingly, they endeavored to create a form of government that struck them as more fair and more effective than that which came before them. Above all they were determined to avoid the trappings of a hereditary monarchy. Drawing on experience, historical perspective, and the ideas of many a classic philosopher, they built what Lincoln would later call, after what might be deemed the culmination of our own internal struggle with the extents of decentralization, a government “of the people, for the people, and by the people.” I can think of no more succinct words to describe the decentralization of power from a monarchy than Lincoln’s. The effort of the Founding Fathers was to conceive of a form of government in which the power to rule was diffused to the people. In doing so they first debated and agreed upon a written Constitution, a document that to this day makes up the core of our system of government. For all its power and weight the Constitution is nothing more than the inbuilt parameters of a decentralized system, no different from those of a computer networking protocol. It is the skeleton set of rules, rights, and privledges which, provided compliance, allows a more complicated system of problem solving, communication, and co-existence. For, at it’s core that is the function of government, to solve the collective problems of a large scale effort to get along.

The form that this government took, outlined by the Constitution, broadly speaking takes the shape of the decentralized web imagined earlier. While the form has changed over the years from that cleanly delineated in the Constitution, broadly speaking, the decentralized structure matches that web. There is a central hub, the federal government, which controls foreign policy, interstate commerce, war, and other matters that have to do with relations from one state to another. Like the central hub in a computing network the idea is that the federal government is tasked with problems of the greatest importance and difficulty, things that carry enough weight to require a unifying answer, or problems tricky enough that confusion or discord has arisen out of State efforts at solutions. The central hub deals with problems that threaten the integrity of the whole system. Off of that central hub branch the States as nodes of this network to which a certain subset of tasks have been offloaded, ideally those that require an ear closer to the voice of the people. By this diffusion of responsibility and authority the Founding Fathers hoped to avoid the problem of the monarchy. At least as outlined in the Constitution the States are tasked with matters of taxation, policing, and others better handled at the node level where localized problem solving capacity can be better used to address the problems of the people, versus the nation as a whole. The system further diffuses as the States each have their own systems of districts and cities, all then taking on a subset of the duties of communication and problem solving. Since before the Constitution was ratified, and continuing to this very day, the debate has raged as to the balance of power between the federal government and the states. That is, a debate over which subset of tasks, and what degree of control over those subsets, a state should have, and which are to be overseen by the federal government. The trend in recent decades has been toward centralization, and it seems this has bred discontent. Discontent justified perhaps because it does not comport with the progress toward decentralization that natural forces demand. Regardless, it would be difficult to argue that this decentralized, web-like form of government has not outperformed, and outlasted the monarchy that came before it.

For all my mention of discontent it can still be argued that such centralization has been slow, and that this slow pace is a product of deliberate design. Our Founding Fathers, wary of the human impulse to strive for power, did not stop at the mere diffusion of power, but also outlined via the Constitution a system of compartmentalization that would task different branches of government with different responsibilities, set those branches in positions of oversight over one another, and in essence against one another in any effort to wrest absolute control from the others. At this point is it worth taking each branch in turn in the effort to understand their decentralized characteristics, and ultimately how they may they may be impacted by a march toward further decentralization.

#### The Executive Branch

At the epicenter of the federal government is the executive branch. On the federal level The President, on the state level the governors, with tendrils snaking their way into the lives of the people via federal and local law enforcement. In one sense the executive branch is epicenter of the central hub, tasked with the execution and direction of both governmental internal function, and the function of the system as a whole. Through the President and various diplomats the executive branch is also the interface with other system of government around the world. In a computing sense this it is the channel through which other master hubs may interface with the entirety of the system, and it is the node tasked with maintaining the overall integrity of the system as a whole. The executive provides a check on the potential power of other branches, and handles the active maintenance of the system at the street level through the police force. At its most core function it is the in/out port, and the bug screening system.

The system is already hierarchical in structure and thus to an extent decentralized within various agencies and police forces as a necessity of large scale deployment. In a system possessed of the degree of complexity of a government of people there is much to discuss before we will be able to tackle the diffusion of executive responsibilities further. A police force is already composed at the lowest level of individuals, tasked with certain responsibilities, handled on a very local geographic level, literally the blocks they patrol. A president is an important interface and maintenance element. Could this diffused to the people? Maybe through better citizen reporting technology? Perhaps. Would such a system hold up to human frailty? That is a question for another chapter (perhaps I’ll write it next semester,) but if we continue my exploration the roadmap may reveal itself. I expect we will find the answer in the idea of laws as code, as an operating system. When that OS is sufficiently nuanced and specific, it may be possible to diffuse the authority of the executive branch. This would, as with the computing model above, require the difficult, but not impossible, proliferation and implementation of an exponentially more complex system of local, or individual enforcement.

Instead of pursuing a brainstorm of the possibilities of decentralization in this branch I will simply point out that in a more decentralized system of computing for example, the structure of the internet this executive function has been partially distributed, via communally understood protocols (TCP/IP), to the intermediate hubs (ISPs), eliminating the need for a central executive. In a fully distributed system these protocols have been structured such that even the intermediate hubs are not required. Such a system is possible in a networked system of computers solving problems, and to an extent we have achieved this with local government and policing, but even computers require bug tracking and anti-virus software to mitigate the effects of human error and malicious code. At the police level we are beginning to see cracks in the form of poor policing, and citizen unrest. While there is certainly more discussion to be had in this space, the further structure of the overall system is, in a sense built to mitigate and ultimately solve these problems. But the system is slow, possibly too slow for the modern population. So, as with the analysis of any system looking with an eye for improvement, we need to look to the other structures of the system, for the executive is only the gatekeeper, and bug tracker. So who fixes the bugs?

#### The Judicial Branch

The Constitution established the Supreme Court, and gave Congress the power to create inferior courts. Courts were tasked with the interpertation, and application of the laws. They created, over time, a structure reminiscent of the same decentralized wheel and spoke web you’ve imagined a few times by now: The Supreme Court at the center, with intermediate federal courts, and state courts radiating outward. Each state possesses their own State court system, from a supreme state court, down to local courthouses. Each progressively further diffused node taking on a smaller, but more specifically local set of problems. By problems, I mean specific sets of facts, and the laws that apply to those facts or, in legal terms, cases. If we think of the laws as code, and the cases as specific scenarios to be run through that code, then the factual scenarios that don’t quite match up with what the law envisioned, are bugs/glitches. Because life is complicated bugs are frequent, and occur constantly, and because the stakes are high we’ve developed a well refined system for assessing every single scenario for any mismatching scenario before deciding what in-built solution to apply, or how to modify our understanding of the code to provide a solution. At the core the Judicial Branch, judges, and lawyers as officers of the court included, are tasked only with processing factual scenarios, and providing fair answers as a result of that process. This means, above all, they are tasked with finding bugs, pointing them out with great specificity, and ultimately interpreting the code to fit the facts.

A case starts at the lower levels and goes through a largely standardized, function-like, system of analysis starting from the particular facts of each unique case. For some cases that analysis starts with a showing of the facts before a jury of your peers, for others that showing is before a judge. The Constitution guarantees you a lawyer, and a good lawyer will do their best to argue the facts of the case in your favor. Whether by judge or jury you receive a decision. After that there are available rounds of appeal; in each you have a chance, not to argue about the facts, but instead about whether or not there has been a fair interpretation and application of the law. The Court of Appeals is required to look at the description and details of your case that your lawyer filed, but they don't have to let you come argue it. On appeal your lawyer is trying to argue that the law shouldn’t apply in the way that the judge or jury decided. Here a group of judges listens, then tells you what they think. Sometimes facts are kicked out as unfair or even illegal, sometimes the case is sent back to a lower court to be argued again, but most of the time they just give you a decision. That decision — insofar as as it is an assessment of the application of the laws to that particular set of facts and the law those facts are purported to have violated— is now part of the law. It is now in essence part of the code, as an interpretive layer. That decision will be used later to decide similar facts. It works this way because the courts are also expected to provide consistency, they are expected to adhere to the precedent of their previous cases. Cases are a matter of public record, anyone can look them up, and in theory use the facts of prior cases to make an argument about the facts of their case. This is what they teach you in law school, that the strongest legal argument anyone can make is an argument from precedent. Lawyers spend most of their time looking up old cases and comparing facts; they spend the rest of the time working on ways to help clients avoid breaking a law in the first place. You learn not only, with great specificity, the rules of the system, but also the important complexities that have, over many years, arisen out of the repeated application. The stretch to bring this system parallel with systems of computation is only a slight one. The laws are literally called codes. Lawyers literally use libraries of cases to make arguments deciphering their value, just as programmers use code libraries to sole particular programming problems. Judges process the lawyers' arguments, and control their motion through the system. The legal system is one really complicated, vagary plagued, processing and debugging system for a massively complex operating system we call law. Specific fact sets come in, answers come out the other side, sometimes quickly, sometimes after years and years of consideration and assessment of the code itself. In this sense, within the constrains of application of the code handed down, it is self healing. The whole system is obsessed with fixing itself.

Quirks aside judicial decision making boils down to a system of functions for problem analysis of greater scrutiny. You can kick your set of facts progressively upward to courts of higher authority, each with narrower rules, and judges with more experience. At all levels of appeal your case is reviewed and accepted based on the complexity of the question of law. If it’s an easy question, you’re done. If the court above believes there is a nuanced enough question, they will then agree the hear an appeal on that case. At the top is the Supreme Court, and their decisions impact the outcome of a large number of cases. This means that the question has come up enough, and been decided by appeals courts of the highest levels in enough varying ways that they feel a federal level decision is important for uniform application of justice. The Constitution guarantees that uniform application, and tasks the Supreme Court with maintenance of the system by which that uniform application is maintained. At the Supreme Court level this often means making decisions about what the constitution itself means. This is why we hear about it in the news. Their decisions are big things, and they should be. By this point the analysis has taken years of processing, has been considered by some of the finest minds in our country, and usually pertains to something weighty, like human rights.

Of all branches the Judicial System is the most cleanly decentralized. The hierarchy is very clear, and the progression through the hierarchy is strict. By necessity the fairness of such a system is important, therefore the operating protocol set out from the beginning rises to a very computer like level of conformity and adherence, at every level failure to adhere may result in no decision, and continued analysis. This makes sense. We literally live and die by this system. The Constitution lays out which crimes, or civil cases will first be tried at what level, and sets forth rules to guarantee uniformity and justice. The system is complicated, and slow, but it is hard to argue for any means of speeding this system up, or further diffusing this system. In a computational sense, this system is the Central Processing Unit for the code of our government, and it is built by the complex networking of minds trained in law schools around the country, and narrowed to their best by judge selection processes. In a sense, just like processors, this system is bound by certain almost physical limitations. Beyond a point it cannot go any faster, or get any smaller without producing an unacceptable number of errors.

Similar to the executive branch, further ways to diffuse this system are possible, but they tend to have problematic consequences. Consequences foreseen by the Founding Fathers, particularly Alexander Hamilton and James Madison as they discuss the "mob" vote of Athens that condemned Socrates to death. Certainly mechanisms for distribution of authority could be imagined, but in such a system the error tolerance is extremely low, and the learning curve is high. As Oliver Wendell Holmes, or Jerome Frank might point out, the pedigree of a judge is important, just as important as the pedigree of the law itself. This may boil down to a very long way of saying that when it comes to the judicial branch, the Founding Fathers of our country whose this structure with deliberate intent. Further decentralization has been tried, and failed to result in justice and cooperation. The development of the US legal system through the centuries, if not millennia, very much tracks developments in computing. First it was of great importance to refine the processing system, to make it smaller, faster, and to increase the fidelity and quality of problem solving on the lowest level. This progression continues in computing, but we have reached a level where processor speed does not limit our ability to solve problems, instead a lack of tailored software to properly present, and handle those problems is the limitation. In our legal system we have built, and continue to refine, a very advanced processor, now we need better code.

#### Lawmaking in a Decentralized System

The very first section, of the very first article of the Constitution of the United States establishes a Congress, but before it even establishes that Congress it gives it the power to make laws. "All legislative powers herein granted shall be vested in a Congress of the United States." Before the President, before the Judiciary, the Founding Father's saw it more important to answer the question, 'who will make the laws?' The entire first half of the US Constitution deals entirely with Congress, made up of a House of Representatives and a Senate, their jobs, and the process by which they are selected. State constitutions track similarly in the creation of state legislatures for the establishment of state laws. These bodies are in essence councils, made up of representatives elected directly by the people. Those representatives are trusted with communicating the problems and needs of the states, the districts within those states, and working with other representatives to provide solutions through the creation of laws and regulations. In some form, at every level, proposed solutions are drafted, revised, and eventually presented to the council for a vote. Those that are voted in, and signed off on by the Executive, become law. This means even the other branches have to follow the new rule.

In theory, being the operatives of government with their ear closest to the people, these representatives are best suited to present the problems of the people, and propose solutions. The voting and ratification systems are complex in themselves, and structured to prevent the passage of laws willy nilly, with checks in both the executive and judicial branches in the form of a Presidential Veto, or a judicial finding of unconstitutionality. Still, at the core, these other branches are only in charge of oversight, execution, application and interpretation. The only ones who get to present new solutions to problems are those in Congress.

A law begins as a bill, which is just a proposed solution to a problem, something a law might fix. That bill was thought up by a representative in response to something they view as a problem, or a question. Something that will, if answered, ideally help make the society under our government better. At their core all laws are simply an answer to a question, "If someone does a certain thing that society would rather they do not do, what should happen?" If a certain set of facts exists around the setup of a business, how should they be taxed? How fast is safe to drive? And on and on to varying degrees of complexity. Most criminal laws are fairly straightforward, don't steal, don't kill. Civil codes get tricker, but at their core they are still just the effort to provide an answer to a question that has, or is expected to come up. All answer certain sets of facts, just as I laid out above, the same facts that the Judicial system is looking at as they process these codes. Congress is in charge of making these codes, and whether Judges agree or not, whether police agree or not on a personal level, this operating code rules all. These are the functions by which the behavior of humans living under a government are processed, it is the software that the Judiciary processes, and the Executive applies.

The Executive is holding people to the code, and catching bugs, the Judiciary is processing cases and debugging, but Congress is writing the code, or their staff, at least. Most bills are dreamt up by representatives, the product of a story in a newspaper, or an issue raised by someone they represent. The representative brings the idea or the problem to their staff with direction to write up the specifics of a solution, and that staff gets to work on the actual writing. At this point most of the actual coding is done by lawyers, and others familiar with the rules of a system. Once the bill is ready, the representative takes it to a meeting of congress and presents it to the representatives from the rest of the country. They all get a copy, and it is looked over, or not, by the other representatives and their staff. The other representatives will often have changes they'd like to propose, and have had their staff draft a version that includes those changes. Sometimes those changes are wildly off topic relative to the original problem that bill sought to solve. This back and forth usually takes place for a long time before a vote in fact takes place. This is most of what the representatives actually do, argue among themselves about which solution is the best, each representative carrying the power of the people who elected them to office. When the arguing is done, and the votes are cast, we have a law, we've written code.

The process by which this code is established is, like the other processes described thus far, hierarchical, and to an extent decentralized, but the decentralization is messy in comparison to the Judicial, and has only gotten messier. Yes, there is no king at the center, but is difficult to see the central hub down to intermediate node structure we've been able to imagine for the other branches. The laws established by Congress stand apart from the law established by State Legislatures, although the Constitution establishes that federal law is the supreme law of the land. Originally there was greater separation between the duties of the states over their people, and the duties of the federal government. The system was more cleanly decentralized as a certain subset of responsibilities, of problems to be solved, were left to state law. In this way there was a clearer filtering procedure for laws. States were a proving ground. If there seemed to be many answers, and great confusion, then Congress would take action to develop a federal standard. Originally they were more reluctant to do so, but this has eroded and the mess is tangible. We see it today in the form of drug laws as some states legalize marijuana in the face of continued federal prohibition. Politicians say that they are "waiting to see how legalization plays out on the state level," a vague allusion to the way the system is meant to function. But they say this as the behavior of any state legalizing is still technically federally illegal. That is to say, in a realm that is meant to be the purview of the states, a citizen in full compliance with those laws, could be scooped up by the federal executive and jailed. Sometimes this federal supremacy is warranted, sometimes it's simply a mess. Either way, this is an apt demonstration of a system not cleanly decentralized.

Lawmaking is decentralized in the sense that the representatives are chosen by the people, and those representatives on their own come up with the code that will proposed, but there is no clean system of diffusion like we see in the judiciary. In theory, at the most diffused nodes are meant to be the people, but here we have a break, mostly out a necessity. The people vote for a representative, and after that their connection to the making of the code that will then be used to govern their life is mostly finished. There are city and town councils where we can make a showing and have their opinion hear, even state legislatures, and in extreme cases congress, but none of those are bound to do anything but listen. Similarly, the next level up the chain has no obligation to listen to the decisions or concerns of the council below. The level above takes a look at what they're up to, but generally just does what they want, sometimes with motives toward helping the people, more often in recent years with motives more bent toward the security of their jobs, or a "victory" for the political party they represent regardless of the needs of their constituents. There is a reason recent congressional approval ratings are historically low. The system by which we generate the operating system for our country is a mess.

To relate the structure to the computational mechanisms I have thus far used, our congressional system is closer to the distributed model, and at a very very low level. Rather than a central hub, that is, a single person, like a monarch, tasked with making decisions regarding which laws are to be instituted, the Founding Fathers took that responsibility and distributed it collectively to the representatives of the many states. From there the closest to following a web like structure is then the minor respect given to state legislatures, and the tenuous link to the people by virtue of election. The mess we see today is no surprise, the monarch-like center replaced with a room full of arguing representatives, but this structure is necessary. Much like the complexity required in the Judiciary to account for the complexity of life and human nature, the distributed structure of this central mechanism is of great importance. While the inefficiencies may currently bog down public impression of the efficacy of congress, a distributed power structure at this level is the only way to assure laws are passed which best meet the needs of a large, varied and complex populace, and they pass with at least the opportunity of influence from all other parties.

While it is messy, Congressional structure, or some nearly akin to such structure is ideal at the top of the chain by which the operating code of our society is written. That code is intended to represent the will of the people, and the will of the people is meant to be the sword that the representative shall weird, and with a listen to only the quickest of Congressional debates we can hear them do so. Yet approval ratings continue to plummet. Those numbers mean to be a metric by which to measure how well Congress are doing their job. So it seems, progressively more poorly over recent years, has Congress actually represented the will of the people they are tasked to represent.

Thus we reach the point of failure in the march toward decentralization as applied to our form of "democratic" government: the link to the people. It is from this point that I endeavor to envision the application in government, and specifically lawmaking, of technologies developed in the context of computing. These technologies developed not only for the collaborative maintenance of massive bases of computer code, but the system by which coders are educated and able to participate in the mechanism of problem solving. By the application of these technologies at scale, it may be possible to continue to build upon the idea of our Forefathers in their establishment of a distributed system for the powers of Congress. It may be possible to further decentralize the most important, and most powerful branch of government, pushing further toward the people the power over the problems dealt with, and the solutions eventually turned to code, and processed through the system at large.

1. Holmes, O. W. Jr., "The Path of The Law," _Harvard Law Review,_ vol. 10 (1897), pp. 457-68

# An Image Problem
The United States Government has an image problem. As I write this primary elections are underway for the 2016 presidential election. In both parties there are candidates battling for the nomination who defy the status quo, and whose shocking popularity seems to be driven by a distaste for the state of operations in the current government. Congress has all-time low approval ratings, and general faith in the government to do anything right is stunningly poor. This is driven by a now lengthy track record of mutual obstructionism and arguing among the parties, along with increasingly invasive systems of domestic surveillance and persecution. Regardless of the finger pointing that could be done from here, it's a mess, and the simple fact is this: the people no longer trust the government, and what's more they feel helpless. This is a big problem in a system that purports to be a government "of the people." In a democracy the greatest power one citizen has is meant to be their vote. Yet we are now watching a democratic primary in which one candidate is consistently carrying fewer delegates in spite of winning the popular vote in any given state. Systems that were meant to normalize are starting to seem a bit more like rigging of the system. This marginalizes the idea that a vote counts. Numerous among my peers have expressed to me this year that they do not intend to vote simple because, "what does it matter?" This is both understandable and disappointing. It is my hope that by the end of this discussion we will have developed the framework of a system by which a voice might be given back to the people on a level greater than just the vote, and the shouting that can be done in the streets. But, here it is not my intent to continue to prod at the flaws I hope to improve, but rather to understand and help to cast off the baggage which any reader or contributor might bring, and must set aside in order to move forward.  

With this in mind it seems worthwhile at this point to step back from the mechanical conversations of the previous section to discuss problems of the government as a whole. The very reasons I feel the need to discuss this topic, briefly laid out in my introductory section, are also problems that may cut at the ability to discuss the underlying concept of democracy. This means they cut at the ability to build toward tools to better facilitate that democracy. It will be important as we move forward with theoretical and philosophical conversations to discuss how we move past a number of ever-present sticking points that will be a waste of time to deal with repeatedly. Ultimately it is my hope that the discussion of such possible evolutions of government and the process of lawmaking will help with a great number of these struggles. But until we've gotten to that point there will be many junctures at which a philosophical train of discussion could be derailed with thoughts akin to 'yes, but congress is NOT making laws that reflect the will of the people.' Or one might be inclined to point out the stunning lack of popularity of certain laws passed near the time of this writing (2016.) These laws seemed to go into effect at the behest of a minority agenda toward "religious freedom" or something similar. To point this out is not unwarranted, and yes, it does make the theoretical discussion of the tools of democracy being "of the people" lose weight. In the effort to move forward constructively this section is an attempt to need only say this once in depth. The following difficulties are both the reason that the system must evolve in order to achieve the most perfect democracy, and the reason that the foregoing discussion, as it pertains to the law, may sometimes seem out of tune with the way things actually function. 

The first, and primary sticking point is wanton corruption. I mean this not to point out that there is such corruption within our government, but rather wanton corruption as a broader idea that will always be an answer to discussions of the function of a system of government. Politically corruption is the equivalent of a broken piece in a mechanical system. If we are trying to discuss the function of a linkage of some sort 'well, what if some piece is broken' will always disrupt the conversation. Of course with broken pieces the system won't work, but it shouldn't keep us from learning how a linkage would or should function without that broken piece. And it shouldn't keep us from from trying to conceptualize a better linkage. Throughout this piece we will try to discuss ideas of democracy, and topics like the motivation for following a law. In such a discussion it will always be a refutation to say that the criminally insane will never follow a law, or simply "what about the assholes?" Similarly the question of corrupt lawmakers and representatives, or lawmakers and representative that do not do their positions justice, will always make it difficult to ask questions like "why do we follow a law?" Here the struggle is not to let the baggage of the real world, or our distaste with the current government push us to apathy, or cynical thought. We must proceed with the discussion on the idea of a true democracy, or at least a better representative democracy. That is to say, a government of the people. Would this system of government most likely be disrupted by the corrupt? Most certainly. Will there be corruption? Most certainly. Is it possible to evolve a system of government that increases the ability of the people to keep this corruption in check? I think so. But first we need to be able to talk about how the system would be in the absence of said corruption.

So I return to the United States government's image problem. Currently, in the United States there is a sense that the government is particularly corrupt. That sense fueling the popularity of extreme candidates from both sides of the aisle. That sense also breeds the disenfranchisement within the people that could, taken to its furthest end, be the collapse of democracy. Of course, this collapse is unlikely, but it may still get worse before it gets better. I return to this increasing voter apathy only because it is at the core of a crisis for democracy. If the people don't vote, then there is no democracy. As discussed in previous chapters the vote is meant to be the expression of the will of the people. Perhaps it is difficult in times of such turmoil not to assume that disengagement and apathy is part of the system, but to have a fruitful discussion about how to change a democratic system of government for the better we assume that this apathy can be counteracted. That it can, via better technological or ideological systems, be manipulated. And so we hit the next of the broad sticking points in the conversation to be had about the evolution of democratic government in the decentralized age: "what if no one takes part?" Similarly to the question of corruption this is both a valid question and one that if asked consistently will merely keep the conversation from moving forward. We must proceed on the premise that people will take part in a democracy if given that chance. If they do not then we do not have a democracy. But in all sincerity I don't worry about this because... cat videos. Clay Shirky talks at length in his book "Cognitive Surplus" about the value of cat videos on the Internet. The point is that the chaff of cat videos ride along representing a wave of voluntary use of the collective free time the scale of which we've never seen. Lots of people use that time for cat videos, but some use it to make Wikipedia. The premise of the theoretical discussion is both that people want to be heard, and that given the platform, via vote, or more thorough involvement, they will take part. As with the example of corruption, I now attempt to dispel this concept broadly. Yes, any system I propose will not function in the absence of engagement from the people. Democracy will not function in the absence of the engagement of the people. To hold this as a consistent argument as we move forward will only hurt your ability to maintain the conversation about how to craft a better system. The question of engagement is fundamental because the answer is that if no one will take part -- we do not have a democracy, or even a republic.

Away from sticking points, and the effort to broadly frame the discussion of theoretical democracy, there is a key aspect to the image problem of the government yet to be discussed. This relates to the themes of my introduction, and is more broadly an argument in favor of new ways of doing things. Or at least the appearance of a new way of doing things. The government's image problem is a big deal exactly for the reason that I dispelled the disengagement argument so broadly: if people do not take part then we have no democracy. But there is something else here in the respect that we must have for that image problem. That is to say, if there is an image problem it does not even matter if the underlying system is doing just fine. In a democracy the function of the government and the people's perception of the function of the government are intrinsically linked. If people perceive that the government is not working they may disengage, or they may engage further in the effort to drive change. This system of perception is, though, a two way street in the sense that when people see that the government is, to their taste, doing well they may also disengage for the fact that they do not see that their action is needed. So there is a balancing act to be performed with regards to the perception of a democratic government. The people must feel that they are part of the system, and they must see the fruits of any efforts come to pass. This is why the presidential election holds such significance in US politics although there is arguably more power up for grabs in congressional elections. Certainly the selection of our prime diplomat and our commander and chief is important, but the real reason we make so much of the presidential election lies in the simplicity. The country votes, one winner is chosen. When it comes to people seeing the impact of their engagement the results are easier to see. In a democracy it is important for the people to feel that they are part of the system, that they are at least heard, and even better, able to engage. 

Important in the above are notions of transparency, and surely transparency is another point where US democracy has a problem, and an image problem. In an age of increasing ability to share, and to do so not just quickly, but in real time, it becomes increasingly difficult to accept a form of government ideologically intended to be "of the people" that then fails to assent to certain degrees of transparency in their actions and operations. The need for this transparency is well established, and largely built into our government. Most government documents, certainly those pertaining to legislation and taxes are public by law. That said, they are difficult to obtain, and this becomes an increasing image problem. The perception of this lack of transparency grows increasingly dim as sharing tools proliferate and become ingrained in our culture. As it gets easier to share in everyday life, and our Government doesn't keep pace it gets easier to think they don't care. The 2008 election brought many promises of transparency that eight years later are still merely churning their way toward implementation. With our current election we are seeing even greater discontent no doubt fed on some level by the increasing sense that the government exists apart from the people. What transparency we do have does not take the form of open sharing by the government. It takes the form of begrudging assent to Freedom of Information requests, submission to the demands of journalists, or whistleblowers. Without the resources or knowhow to file their own FOIA request the average person must rely mostly on the journalists. This information, if obtained, is then spread to the people through increasingly non-standard media channels. Those media channels, dealing with their own struggle with decentralization, have leaned further and further away from reporting. Their turn toward editorial has, in turn, pushed anyone hungry to actually know what is going on to further diffused sources of information. This is problematic once the source is ultimately so diffused as to be suspect. And so the government has a transparency problem, which deepens the image problem feeding the disenfranchised. 

It is with a view to these sticking points, and these problems of transparency and perception that I advocate broadly for fundamental changes in the mechanical processes of government. Changes to harness the growing ability of technology to provide transparency. Changes to harness the growing ability to maintain accountability. Changes to harness the growing ability to coordinate massive teams of people to solve problems. We do this by pushing government to evolve further in parallel with the trends of decentralization seen in the realm of computing. By these systems we may make government inherently more transparent, inherently more accountable, and by these changes begin to build a system in which the people have more faith. A system that facilitates, invites, perhaps even requires greater involvement of the people can, by the nature of the system, itself be more transparent at all levels. It will, by the nature of the system itself, breed accountability for actions, decisions, and changes. The goal is to begin redesigning the processes of the government not only to better match the modern world, but to incorporate what we have learned from centuries of design thinking. We can continue to be concerned about how things should be, and we can continue to tell other people how they should be, or we can simply design a system by which there can be no other way. This is what the Framers of our US Constitution once did in response to their own struggles. It is with this goal that I proceed from my introduction of technology, government, and decentralized systems to an explanation of the tools by which we will build such a systems, and ultimately ideas of how that system itself might function.

# Massive Collaboration

Massive collaboration exists all around us. Every day we live alongside a massive group of people that are mostly, although the media would certainly have us believe otherwise, civil and cooperative. By just living in a democratic society we are taking part in massive collaboration. But this is what I would call a passive collaboration. We cooperate primarily by simply following the rules, by not actively doing anything to work against the peace. In this context the process in which we take part is one of maintenance. We work together to maintain a sort of cooperative homeostasis. But what about active participation in this same system? What form does this take? And what good does it do? Increasingly that is the question leaving a voting populace as disenfranchised as ever. Can one be actively involved? What percentage of the effort to be involved is actually helpful? Actually effective? In our current system the answers to these questions always feel too tinged with optimism or faith in a certain system for the average cynic to bear. The answer is that we actively participate through our vote, which is ignored by our representatives with increasing frequency (see the previous section.) For those who want to do more the answers to the question of how to be involved are frustrating. Donate money. Volunteer time. All things that simply support the system. Both of those answers are simply means to support a candidate, to pull votes one direction or another. Those answers boil down to "help us manipulate the voting system." This is not active participation in the sense where efforts result in output. Retreading to the notion of the decentralized system, this is a break. This is not part of the system, this is more the polishing of the housing in which the system runs. Then how can we be involved, hands on, with impact we can see? Impact we can track on an ongoing basis, like sports scores, or retweets? The answer is that the system must change, it is time for the next evolution of the decentralized system of governance. Lucky for us, visionary programers, like Linus Torvalds already built all the tools that we need so that **they** could build things like the Linux operating system. We don't need to reinvent the wheel, we need only use it to maintain a different codebase: the US code.

Taking a step back, it seems relevant at this point to talk about what is meant when we say "massive." There is a whole separate book to be written about the difficulties of scale that arise when trying to wrap your head around the quantity of communication that takes place in the world of computers. Still, it is important to try, because it will impact the ability to understand not only how certain collaborative tools came to be, but why they work and the impact they could have. Certainly a large number of people are employed by the government. The size of the United States government in expenses and manpower dwarfs even large companies. Yet the number of people using the internet to communicate, the number of clicks, and the number of dollars spent on the internet put even the size of the world's largest governments to shame. The size of the internet, and **that** vastness of communication is what we mean when we say "massive." Not hundreds, not thousands, not even merely millions of people. Hundreds of millions. Billions. Google gets over three billion search queries A DAY. This is the level of traffic we are talking about. Linux, which I will discuss more in this section, is the collective work of over ten thousand programers, from one thousand different companies. Wikipedia has twenty eight million registered users. So this is the scale we are dealing with here. Moving forward with the idea of "massive collaboration" it is important to try to think of this scale. We are not talking about the coordination of the efforts of an office full of people, or even a team of a few hundred. We are talking about millions.

Now lets look at the "collaboration" part of the title before diving into greater depth on the tools we're talking about here. It is of value to look more closely at the passively collaborative system I mention above, to see the extent to which we are already steeped in cooperation and collaboration on a truly massive scale as we live in this democratic republic. We've begun with a look at the structure of the US Government, and its function in processing and producing code. As we work our way toward a discussion of possible future evolutions of this system it is important to step back a bit further to a broader question: What are laws? Why do we follow them? They guide our actions every day, but when was the last time you really stopped to think about what a law is? I don't mean, 'a bill becomes a law, so on and so on.' I mean on a philosophical level, what is a law? Why do we have laws. The knee jerk answer is surely that we follow laws because otherwise we get in trouble. But, I'm going to go out on a limb here and guess that if you picked up a paper called "Crowdsourcing Democracy" or if you're reading this because you're interested in contributing to the project, that you follow laws because you believe that (mostly) they represent the right thing to do. If not that then at least you believe that laws represent the will of the people that these be the rules by which we agree to shape our behavior. Recently, in the course of a conversation about the state of democracy, and in response to what was probably a cynical comment on my part, a programer friend said, "maybe you're right, but I also get a nice fuzzy feeling every time people pull over to let an ambulance pass. That's cooperation." At my core, like he, I'd also like to believe that everyone is pulling over for the ambulance because they know that it's a good thing to do. Not simply because they otherwise might face legal consequences for failing to follow the law. Even aiming only for the middle ground, that most people are pulling over because they'd like you to do the same once they're the ambulance passenger, what we're talking about is cooperation, collaboration. So we can look at the laws as the guiding principles by which we know how not to get in trouble. We can look at them as the tools that let us know what everyone else is thinking with regards to appropriate behavior. Or, we can look at them as simply a reflection of how people would like to be treated themselves. Whether you are inclined toward the "carrot" or the "stick," the material function of "a law," you know, all those words, the actual characters, the code; the purpose of most laws is to tell us what the rules are so we can all get along. For that is all that a democratic society is, in any form, meant to be: a system of massive cooperation. The US Code, that is, the collection of all laws by which be govern society is simply a program. One written, and modified over time through the system broken down in earlier chapters. Written to keep a huge number of people living in the same place, in cooperation.

It would seem, following from this way of looking at laws that the people demand a certain degree of input as to what these rules are. As it turns out, beyond casting a vote, the public has very little say in what actually ends up written in the code. Given the extent to which society is itself a cooperative and collaborative effort, we should take a look at how "collaborative" the process of generating that code actually is. In the earlier section we looked quickly at the governmental processes from the standpoint of decentralization, but what about lawwriting from the standpoint of collaboration? The people vote for representatives, and those representatives are tasked with writing, presenting, and defending the laws that they think are in the interest of the population they represent. The piece of paper they wave the whole time is covered in code. Ultimately, these representatives vote on every other bill presented, and those that pass become law. That new program, for whatever, is integrated. A computer programer would say it's been "committed" to the codebase. This absolutely does not clear the bar for "massive" collaboration. This isn't internet sized collaboration. Certainly it is collaborative in the sense that the population is working together to pick a representative. But after the election process this representative's team is working together to write a bill. To be very clear: this team is probably 5 lawyers in a conference room. They are the ones writing the code. Different representatives' teams are working together to combine and modify. You know, do political stuff. Never mind that step. That's all lawyers talking to lawyers. What we're here to look at is the actual writing of the code. How massively collaborative, how "democratic" is the process of writing the words that sit on the piece of paper your representative is pointing to? The answer is, it's not. Maybe they took some input in a town meeting, maybe they even took comments on the web, but ultimately most bills are written by five to ten staffers in a representative's office, and they are written to the specifications called for by the representative. Until they hit the floor for debate in Congress the people who elected the representative don't get to see the bill, and even once they are available for debate there is little short of contacting your representative that can be done to proactively remedy a fault in that bill. This is not a collaborative process on the scale of the internet. This is the break point for the decentralization. This is not decentralized. On any level. At this node, lawmaking is centralized. The only ones putting ideas on paper are those in the representatives office.

I'm not saying we should all get to write the laws, but I want to put in your minds the idea that we should at least get to know what's in them before it's too late for us to do anything. The number of people enlisted to write a bill works the way it does out of necessity, just as monarchies functioned as they did out of the necessity of the time. But, as discussed previously, the evolution of communication technology and the ability to decentralize a system of communication march hand in hand. Previously the notion of taking input on a bill from a massive number of people was simply not workable. There would be too much paper, too much reading, too much editing, too much work to keep the bill coherent. This is not really a problem, we've already figured out how to do things like this at the scale of the internet. We built the tools to solve these problems so we could manage massive teams working on massive libraries of code, so computers can do what they do today.

## The Tools

The first thing to understand about programing is that it's simply writing. They call it "writing code." The language you are speaking is the language of computational problem solving, and the grammar depends on the programming language. But everything a computer does, every action, every picture, every tool, every status update can be distilled to letters and numbers. Those letters and numbers are arranged to form units of communication, those units are then arranged to perform a function, and those functions further organized to make a program. When your average person looks at a codebase it looks like nonsense, when a programer looks at it they see language. Looking at the whole thing from this angle, you can see how it isn't much different from a paper, or a book, or, well, at this volume of content, an encyclopedia. Let's go with an encyclopedia. If the code for Linux, a popular open source operating system, were printed on paper it would be in the neighborhood of one hundred thousand pages of text. This is a very large document. As you can imagine, a document this size takes a team to write. Take a moment and think to yourself how you would go about organizing this team. You'd probably break the things that needed to be written about into smaller chunks and then you'd give those chunks out to different smaller teams to oversee. "You're in charge of the letter 'T'" and so on. If those chunks were still too big, they'd get split by the team into smaller chunks, overseen by another team, and so on, until we're down to a single writer working on a manageable document. In an encyclopedia we're now down to, "you go write an entry about Turtles." Sound familiar? Maybe like the decentralization we picked through in earlier sections? Such decentralization is not just unique to computing systems, or governments. It informs the organizational structure of any complex team. For an encyclopedia it's very easy to envision the branching tree structure of this organizational chart. Everyone works on their chunks, they are collected, most likely edited some to fit, and stitched together to make up the master document. In that way it's like wheel structure, there's still a master hub: the main document. When writing code programers are dealing with a similar struggle. The codebase is massive. Only certain chunks can be worked on at any time. No problem, just apply the same organizational structure as the other big document, the encyclopedia, right? Unfortunately, no. Well, in a sense, yes, but it gets complicated fast.

As Clay Shirky put it aptly in the TED talk referenced in my introduction to this project, "computers are notoriously inflexible." Computers are really good a processing code. But if that code is not correct, they are really bad at figuring out what the programer meant to put there. And here we have the first hurdle to organizing a team to work on a document this large: code is processed in a linear fashion. Yes, it is in essence a giant document made up of text, but each of those chunks of code depends on other chunks to function. If someone gets into the code and makes some changes that cause that chunk of code to fail at its foundational job, then everything on top of it will also fail. To carry this to the encyclopedia analogy, imagine that to get to any given entry you have to read the whole thing, in order. If you hit a typo you have to start reading over at the beginning. If the entry for "Apple" has a typo in it, then the entry for "Elephant" would be inaccessible, and the book would sometimes catch on fire. As it relates to organizing a team to work on this document we have a tricky situation. Because a team member can only handle so much on their plate, tasks still need to be split up. But you can't simply mash all of the product back together after everyone has done their work. You can't do this because the chunks taken out are actually directly dependent on one another, you can't always tell what's broken, and often if one thing is broken the whole program will crash. This dependence breaks the standard organizational structure we were inclined to use. This hurdle is also shared by the law. In Shirky's talk he presents a graph of the interdependency of different sections of the United States Tax Code. This is not code in the sense of an operating system like Linux, but it is code in the sense of the government as operating system I broke down before. It is the set of rules by which our system of taxation operates. Similar to Linux, a change to one piece can break another piece. The Tax Code is a very very long interdependent document. So is Linux. Updating both are more work than one person can handle.

Because of the above mentioned interdependencies there's also a massive coordination problem that arises when we try to organize and administer a team working on one of these documents. Now think about a house versus an encyclopedia. The encyclopedia, read in order, is the codebase. What the computer spits out after it reads the code is the program, that's a house. If you want a window in your house you should probably hire a contractor. That contractor will start by measuring the space into which a window is going to fit. Then the contractor goes away to build the window, and bring it back. And any decent contractor will expect some "roughing in" to get that window to sit in the right place, and properly perform its functions. In the case of a codebase, and luckily for the programers, they aren't stuck with a house they have to travel to in order to double check the window. They are still dealing with a house though. That is to say, as work goes on changes need to be made, and those changes need to be checked against the dependencies before a finished product can be declared. Because it isn't a house, and a codebase is simply a text document so programers can take the house with them. This is a bonus, but it also gets us to the second hurdle: a coordination problem. Now imagine a thousand copies of the same house all with the empty space meant for a window, and each copy has a different contractor. Each contractor will install their window, in their copy of the house, at which point you get to tour all of them, pick the window you want, and then just live in that house like you always lived there. It's easy to imagine that the coordination of all of these contractors gets a bit messy when everyone has their own copy of the house, and they're working on more than windows, but lets just stick with the window for now. We need to get that window in there, everyone agrees on what a window looks like, and the basic function of the window, but there are many ways to skin that cat. You'll end up with some designs that make the hole smaller to fit one type of window, others that commit to a larger window, windows that open out, slide up, and so on. Each of those window designs, of course, having an impact on other things like airflow through the house, what can go in the yard outside the window, how much wall space there will be left to paint, so on and so on once again. Little tweaks here and there, the "roughing in" that needs to happen after everyone gets their window built. Now all thousand people who took their copy of the house off to work come back with their different fixes and tweaks to other parts to make those fixes work, and what do you have? Not an encyclopedia, and maybe not even a house if the changes were all extreme enough. Now you have a thousand different options for possible solutions to the initial problem "we need a window here." Again, here is where it makes sense that laws are called codes, as they again have in common this coordination problem. The laws need to be freely accessible, so everyone can read them and follow them. And as we begin to let our system of government chug along everyone has their ideas for how to fix the laws. Every team, made up of representatives and their staffers listens to some of those ideas, maybe forms their own, then takes their copy and goes off to work to get that idea in there. And they have exactly the same problem. Everyone comes back with their various different solutions, and all of the "roughing in" that it takes to make the solution fit. Lucky for contractors, wood is forgiving. Laws are as unforgiving as computer code. The leeway for "roughing in" is minimal before a typo in the entry for "Apple" breaks the entry for "Elephant."Interdependency and coordination are not problems unique to any of these situations, they are the reasons for any sort of hierarchical organizational structure. These struggles are the reason that governments are so large, and companies like Microsoft are so big. The larger the organizational diagram gets in order to mitigate the effect of these hurdles, the more managers are needed to keep everything from breaking.

Now let's introduce another quirk that will help us understand the evolution of the tools to which this is an extended introduction: the open source movement. The "source" in open source refers to the code. The code underlying a program, which I have to this point called the "codebase" is sometimes called the source code. The "open" source model is a model of software development in which the source code for a piece of software is publicly available. Anyone can download the code, anyone can modify this code, and anyone who does so agrees to a license which stipulates that their work will also be public and freely edited by anyone else agreeing to the same "open" license. This model exists in opposition to a "closed" source model, which is that favored by anyone or any company who wants to keep their software proprietary. Closed software is more easily leveraged for profit, sometimes for security. Regardless of the motivation for an open versus closed model, the open model increases the difficulty brought about by the problems of interdependency and coordination by factors. Imagine all of the struggles I mentioned above, but in an open system. Take away the management gatekeeper that might oversee the large and complicated system required to keep all of this dependency and coordination from cascading into full on failure. Now not only are we looking at those two problems, but we just invited anyone interested to hop onboard with their edits, with their input. Sounds crazy, right? Sounds like an unmanageable mess, right? Well, we have this movement to thank for the tools that I hope we can now turn toward government to make our system truly one of the people. People like Linus Torvalds, the programer who started Linux (and from which it draws its name,) believed that open source, and massive collaboration on complicated projects would be the best way to facilitate projects of the scale needed for the advancement of technology. Software needed to be democratic, development of the software needed to be decentralized. In the face of the extent to which all of seems so difficult to manage, the open source movement took hold and ultimately this same movement developed the tools it needed to let itself persist. Tools like Git, and Stack Overflow.

### Git

Faced with the difficulties and complications mentioned above the open source programers, instead of abandoning the effort, built tools to help solve these problems. The first of these was a program called "Git." Git is what we call a "version control system." Broken down, that's quite literally a system by which all of the different versions of a codebase that have been checked out to be worked on, like we talked about above, are controlled. Git was literally developed by the same people that were working on Linux because they saw a looming coordination crisis as numbers grew, and maintenance of a stable codebase via email was increasingly difficult. They had used similar systems before buckling down to build Git, but most of them were costly, and still suffered from a degree of lag in coordination that made it difficult for multiple to people to work simultaneously. Part of the concern was not just that coordination is handled, but that collaborative effort is maximized. In a movement like the open source movement you have a lot of people working for free, simply because think they can help or they want to test out an idea at a solution for a problem noted by another user. When people are working for free, burning their time with inefficiency is foolish, and will reduce willingness to participate. Git was built with this in mind, and works through a "repository" system. A repository, or a "repo," is a folder that contains everything you need to run the program. The main code, subfiles, etc. When running Git, any change made to a repo is given a unique identifier, and this ID is recorded in a .git file, which is included with everything else. This means the ID ledger is downloaded by anyone else who copies the repo. When software is open source anyone can also freely make a copy of the full repo, they call this "forking", or they can start their own "branch" of changes. Each of those count as a change, get their own identifier, and are recorded in the repo. As a program continues to take shape, and code is added, removed, written, and rewritten, every single set of edits gets its own ID, and all of this is included in the repo. When using a version control system a repo is ultimately not just a giant document with thousands of pages of code like I described above, but it is also a canonical record of every change that has ever been made to that code base and which programer, or team, made that change. In that sense it is the code as well as the history of every state in which that code has ever existed. You can see from the terminology used, words like "fork" and "branch" it is almost easier to visualize a codebase using Git as more of a tree than a long long document. Each change is a branch. A repo is not just a program, but a record of all the decisions and work that got the team to the final product.

When it comes to coordination and collaboration the use of a version control system has a number of benefits. To begin with, many people can work on the same codebase without catastrophically breaking anything, while still giving them the access they need to the whole interdependent system to make sure nothing will break. They can fork the whole codebase, run the program, make their changes, and see if it still works, all on their own computer, not editing the master repo they made the copy off of. If it doesn't work they can keep working at fixing it, if it does they can submit these edits. This is called a "commit," I mentioned them before. This means the edits have been added to the Git ID ledger. After this those edits can be submitted to the main branch to be added to the "master" repo. Because the system is based not around full code documents, and instead around changes, things can happen much faster. The system is able to identify only the places where the code is now different, and present those changes to a manager, usually a "lead programer" who okays them to go into the main codebase. Instead of having to send the whole document back to the lead programer, the only thing that shows up, in a view where it's quite easy to see the changes, are the changes themselves. The lead programer can then add those to the main codebase with a single click. Everyone else working on other changes will see no difference on their fork until they sync to the main repo. Once they sync they have the new master repo code, and can get back to editing without worrying about breaking the master codebase. This is the first big benefit: by tracking changes instead of completed documents, the amount of information that needs to be sent back and forth is considerably decreased. All that needs to be sent is the tracking data, and the changes, instead of a whole, now different, copy of the program. Next the canonical nature of the version tracking makes it so that the code is forever backed up. Here it helps to imagine the tree structure I alluded to earlier. If the lead programer checks out all the changes, and they seem good in theory, but in practice they break the program, fixing it is as simple as backing up to the last fork in the tree. Before the changes were committed to the codebase, and broke the whole thing. Because the repo is not just the program, but the record of all the changes ever made, we can just back up to the last place the program functioned, and try again. The ability to do this also facilitates massive collaboration on other levels. With so many people working on a project there are bound to be conflicts, the ability to simply go back in time to before a conflict broke things is important, and easily facilitated by version control software like Git. What's more, each of the changes can be associated with the person who made that change. This means that a team member who regularly submits changes that don't work can be identified, helped, or, worst case, dismissed from the project. Luckily, with the ability to roll back errors so easily, learning how to improve as a programer becomes much more about practice, and much less about theory.

### Github

The powers of a tool like Git collided with the notions of openness born of the open source movement and the result was the "open repository" or "public repo" and tools like Github. While the functions of Git and similar version control systems allow large numbers of programers to work on a project at the same time, there is no inbuilt function for sharing. A repo might be hosted only on a company's local server, with the company's programers using Git to coordinate changes. That repo might even have an address where anyone can access the code if they know that address. But there is no inherent capacity of Git that makes the repository "open." This is a question of how to share a repo to really make it open, in line with Open Source kind of open. In came Github (and similar services.) Github is a web based repository hosting service, and has grown into a sort of social network of programers. Github facilitates the sharing of open source documents by providing a degree of centralization. It does not centralize in the sense of control mechanisms described in the earlier chapter, there is no control over the programing that takes place. Rather Github is a service providing a set of parameters for hosting and sharing repositories. In that way it functions more like a town square. Github provides free accounts which allow anyone to host a certain number of public repositories. The public nature of these repos means that anyone can fork, and then work on the code same as above. They can then submit those changes and the host can choose to incorporate the changes. With a paid account on Github a programer can host private repos, for which an invite is required. I have a Github account (you can look it up, @thekerp) and although I don't know in what form you may be encountering this piece, early versions of this very writing were hosted on Github in an open repo. When working within a Github repo all changes made, and tracked via the Git dynamic discussed above, are tied to a user's Github account. In essence Github puts a social layer on top of the coordination tool that is Git. (This idea of layering will continue to come up. Keep it in mind.) Github draws the power of Git out into the public space, and invites anyone to play. Not only does this democratize the ability to have an impact on the shape of the programs hosted in any given public repo, but it even further facilitates and democratizes the chance to learn and improve. Git, with a layer like Github on top begins to become the embodiment of "the marketplace of ideas" so tightly tied to the First Amendment to the US Constitution. In a world of open repositories good code stays, bad code is weeded out.

It is easy to see how a version of such a system might carry over to the realm of lawmaking, or even law in general. In fact the extent to which version control should be used for iteration in law writing makes the topic almost boring. Laws should be kept in repos, and a Git-like system should be used to track the history of changes made to the bill or law. This should all be hosted in a Github like structure providing access to any United States citizen, and hell, might as well let them fork the repos if they want. Who knows what they might write. So what happens when a system like Git removes the burden of coordination and collaboration? Even more new and interesting tools begin to emerge. New and interesting dynamics begin to emerge. As discussed, laws are quite similar to code, and certainly suffer from the same problems of coordination when working with a large team. Historically the answer to the problems of coordination have been to limit the size of the team. Pick a representative, and let that person pick a "manageable" number of people to work on drafting a law. If we stop trying to make that team manageable, and we open team membership to anyone who wants to be involved, interesting things happen. In the realm of programming those interesting things are the result of the very last notion in the paragraph above. The ability to roll back errors begets the ability to try and fail, begets the ability to learn by doing. This in turn opens a void where those with resources enough to take a shot at coding are looking for the answers to their questions. Now we have a new problem, for which the world of massively collaborating programers also devised a solution. One that might again have implications for a system of lawmaking.

## Stack Overflow

Tools like Git, and Github not only open up a world in which large scale collaboration on programs as vast as Linux are possible, but also reduce the barrier to entry. In an open source repo the code is freely accessible, and version control allows you not only to keep up with the work of others, but to compare the work of others. To easily incorporate the work of others. And maybe most importantly, try and fail without consequence. Add in that you can write code with the most basic of computers, and you have a perfect scenario for education. It is difficult to learn to build a house, you have to leave a trail of poorly hewn boards in your wake. This gets expensive. When working on a version controlled program you can catastrophically wreck the codebase and simply roll back to the last time that it worked. You can truly learn by doing, a loss of time as your only consequence. Because of this there has sprung up a whole host of tools to help with learning and to help with problem solving. In addition to resources like the now ubiquitous Wikipedia, numerous question and answer sites have sprung up solely to connect people with very specific questions to people who have the answers, and are willing to take the time to explain. Such sites seem most frequently used to convince the general population that they are dying of some disease (Yahoo Answers, I'm looking at you,) but mostly they fill in the gaps where broader resources like Wikipedia do not have the answers. Stack Overflow sprung up to fill the programming gap.

Stack Overflow is named for a software error in which a variable is bigger, in terms of characters, than the space it is meant to occupy. It's usually caused by some sort of accidental recursive operation that if allowed to run keeps adding to a variable until that number is so large there aren't enough characters allocated to keep it in memory. Stack Overflow, the site, is actually a question and answer website devoted to the broad topic of computer programming. Loosely I would guess that the name was pulled from the frustration of running into something like a stack overflow, and the desire to ask someone for help if you are unable to solve it. More likely the name was chosen because it sounds cool. Regardless, the website has a number of features that have made it a remarkable resource for programming knowledge. Stack Overflow was certainly not the first question and answer site to pop up, or even the first devoted to programming, but the creators of Stack Overflow added a few unique features. First, answers, and questions, can be voted on by users. This means that the most common questions, and the most clear questions, rise to the top. Additionally, the answers to the questions end up sorted by which answer is the correct solution to the question. Second, there is a "reputation" system. This system awards points to the writer's profile for up votes on both questions and on answers. Users of Stack Overflow end up with reputation rankings based on both how well they ask questions, and answer them. As a user climbs in reputation they are also given increased permissions and responsibilities within the community. This means they gain ability to edit questions, delete answers, and so on. Included is the ability to close out a question. This is the final feature unique to Stack Overflow. When a question has a satisfactory answer, that is, the solution provided fixes the problem, then the question is closed. It remains in the system, so it shows up in search, but there is no longer any voting. As a resource this answer is considered a functional solution to the problem. Over time this system has created an extremely useful resource on a number of levels. Often you don't even have to submit a question anymore, a simple search will turn up where it's already been asked and answered. Not only are most questions one might have with regards to programming likely already answered somewhere on Stack, but you can look at a programers reputation number to get a decent sense of their standing on the cutting edge of programming. I say the cutting edge because there's no chance to gain points answering the old questions, so points are picked up these days answering and posting new questions in the topics where people are doing new things.

It is difficult to say which of these features of Stack Overflow only function as they do because of the finite nature of a programming solution (that is, because a solution in code either works or doesn't) and which features might be applicable elsewhere. For my purposes Stack Overflow serves as an example not just of an interesting byproduct of the open source movement, and the massive collaboration facilitated by version control software, but as an example of what I call a "merit layer." Specifics aside, Stack Overflow, much like Reddit, has added a merit layer to simple question and answer. One could even argue that there are multiple merit layers. Layer one: the questions and answers are voted on, layer two: those votes result in reputation points. This merit layer is of particular interest in the realm of democracy. Because the idea of merit is inextricably intertwined with any system in which voting takes place. When we vote for a representative we are ascribing merit to the ideas they are expressing as they campaign for the position. We are electing them to take the office of representative, but beyond that we are at least in theory, electing them to execute on the ideas they told us they would. Stack Overflow is an example of how we can, at the the scale of massive communication on the internet, find ways to build in merit layers.

There is no reason a single election, or maybe public protest need be the only means by which we ascribe merit to the ideas and the performance of our chosen delegates, and the laws they try to enact. When we look at a system of version control, a system where every change is tracked, and every change is linked to the person that made that change, it is very easy to see where merit layers might be installed. In the world of modern communication there is little excuse for the reality that our ability as a population to have an effect on the actions of our government stops with a periodic chance to replace our representatives, once again hoping that they stick to their word, or deliver on promises. With the tools that already exist there are fewer and fewer hurdles standing in the way of a system of government more "of the people" than we have ever seen. A government in which transparency reigns supreme, in which a politician's record is accessible as a version control backlog. A government in which their ability to carry out their promises, their ability to write effective laws, and their ability to collaborate to make those laws workable is quantified via merit layers. There is no reason our politicians cannot have a score next to their name by which we are able to ascertain their merit as lawmakers, and as leaders.

# A New System

### With the systems In the previous chapter I mentioned we wouldn't have to reinvent the wheel.

But what form does such a system take? How might these tools actually work applied to a realm other than that for which they were developed? It is doubtful that the translation will be one to one.

That hasn't kept Just dropping all of the U.S. Code into a repo has been done. It's not just a matter of using the tools As Shirky points out in his TED talk there are a number of instances of Github users hosting repos containing the full legal code of the state of Utah, for example. There are even state government initiatives with names like "Open Law," yet we've seen very little momentum in a shift to laws maintained or written in a way that matches the world of open source programming introduced in the previous section.

What's missing? What's the difference?

It has been eluded to in previous sections in passing, but now it is important to understand the idea of layers, and of dynamics. These terms are pulled from my experience in the world of user experience, and program design. They are terms used to discuss how users interact with a tool on a level above the execution of the tool's function. The function of a tool is, in a sense, blunt. A program is designed to do a thing, click the button, it does that thing. Layers are a way of conceptualizing the stacking of different functions, while dynamics are a way of thinking about the interplay that this stacking breeds. As an example: Git has a particular function. It tracks changes, associates those changes with identifying markers, and stores that information in such a way as to create the canonical repository described in the previous chapter. That is the function of Git. In the layer sense it is taking the normal behavior of coding, and adding a tracking layer. The addition of the tracking layer, then creates a different behavior or communication dynamic. In this case the dynamic is the ability to roll back changes, and to collaborate with a massive number of programmers at once. Taking this example a step further, Github has a function: to host and facilitate the sharing of Git repositories. This is a new layer on top of Git, and as Github performs its function it creates a new dynamic: sharing, and democratization of access of open repositories.

The value in understanding the concept of the "layer" and the "dynamic" comes from the need for a higher level discussion about tools for version control, tools for sharing, and tools for research like Stack Overflow. If you go to Stackoverflow.com today you'll notice that somewhere on the page it will likely say something to the effect of "a member of Stack Exchange." After the success of Stack Overflow the creators of the service tried to use the same tools for question and answer sites relating to other topics. Everything from personal fitness to Star Trek the Next Generation. None of these alternative "exchanges" for questions and answers following the model of Stack Overflow have been quite as successful. This is an example of the importance of the dynamic. As it turns out the particular communication dynamic facilitated by the set of functions unique to Stack Overflow is not ideal for question and answer on other topics. By thinking in terms of dynamics we can begin to look at what specific properties of any given function, or layer, lead to a particular result, and we can begin to work toward and understanding of why something like Stack Overflow might not work for personal fitness. It could be a matter of the people who tend to have fitness questions, it could have to do with the nature of the information, that is, programing questions tend to have a very finite and easily demonstrable answer, whereas answers of health and fitness are grey. Perhaps this means that the idea of closing a question once an answer has been reach ends up as a negative function in the discussion of health related topics. If the idea that an answer has been reached and discussion is closed feels counterintuitive then as a dynamic this is not the sort of thing that will drive a user to continue to use the tool.

With this in mind the question then is one of layers, and dynamics. The question is not how do we use the tools of massive collaboration developed and used by open source programmers, but rather how can we look at the functions those tools perform, the layers each represent, and the communication or collaboration dynamics that those layers create. Then we must rebuild and reframe those functions to fit to create and facilitate dynamics of communication, and forms of collaboration that are fruitful in the context of democratic government. In a sense this is no different than the analysis we can see undertaken in the conversations of the Federalist Papers, or the transcript of debate on the floor as the US Constitution was authored. The founding fathers of the United States assessed the functions and dynamics of the monarchy that came before, assessed the dynamics created, and developed new functions to facilitate what they thought to be more ideal dynamics. In doing this they added layers. The election process and the system of representatives is a series of layers all stacked inlace of a monarch. From this point the goal shall be to find even further layers, to continue that march toward decentralization. Where are the layers left to be installed between the desires and needs of the people, and the current endpoint of the system by which those desires become laws? Where might we use the lessons of massive collaboration on software programs to find and add these layers? Where might we create new dynamics of communication that give to the people greater power to impact their democracy?

# Bibliography

Asay, Clark D. “A Case For The Public Domain”, 74 Ohio St. L.J. 753 (2013)

Brito, Jerry. “Hack, Mash & Peer: Crowdsourcing Government Transparency”, 9 Colum. Sci. & Tech. L. Rev. 119 (2008)

Culkin, J.M. (1967, March 18). *A Schoolman’s Guide to Marshall McLuhan.* Saturday Review, pp. 51-53, 71-72.

Frank, Jerome. "Legal Realism," from *Law and The Modern Mind* (Doubleday an Co, 1963)

Fuller, Lon *The Morality of Law.* Yale University, 1964.

Grimmelmann, James. “Anarchy, Status Updates, and Utopia”, 35 Pace L. Rev. 135 (2014).

Holmes, O. W. Jr., "The Path of The Law," *Harvard Law Review,* vol. 10 (1897), pp. 457-68

Karch, Gregory M.. “Bitcoin, The Law and Emerging Public Policy: Towards a 21st Century Regulatory Scheme”, 10 Fla. A & M U. L. Rev. 193 (2014)

Li, William; Azar, Pablo; Larochelle, David; Hill, Phil; Lo, Andrew W. “Law is Code: A Software Engineering Approach to Analyzing the United States Code”, 10 J. Bus. & Tech. L. 297 (2015)

Nakamoto, Satoshi. *"Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System."* (2008): n. pag. Web.

Negroponte, Nicholas. *Being Digital.* New York: Knopf, 1995. Print.

Orozco, David. “The Use of Legal Crowdsourcing (“Lawsourcing”) To Achieve Legal, Regulatory, and Policy Objectives”, 53 Am. Bus. L.J. 145 (2016)

Shirky, Clay. *Cognitive Surplus: Creativity and Generosity in a Connected Age.* New York: Penguin, 2010. Print.

Shirky, Clay .*"How the Internet Will (one Day) Transform Government."*  N.p., n.d. Web. 08 Oct. 2015.

Treisman, Daniel. *The Architecture of Government: Rethinking Political Decentralization.* Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 2007. Print. 


