# The March of Decentralization

####Technology
It is worth starting, at this point, from a broader look at the notion of technology. As we will see as this discussion progresses: at every level of social development, and thus legal development, technology has had a impact. In a sense social and legal development is itself technology. It it resoundingly safe to say that the progression of technology, and social order of any sort have gone hand in hand. As Father John Culkin, in a article about the work of renowned philosopher of communication theory Marshall McLuhan, so effectively put it, “We shape our tools and thereafter our tools shape us.”[^1]

“Technology” is derived from the Greek 'tekhnologia', its roots being 'tekhnē,' meaning art, or craft, and 'logia' denoting the study of that craft. While today, because of the consistent development of humankind, “technology” has taken on an association with gadgets and tools, the baseline concept is that of "systematic treatment.” Technology, of any sort is, at its core, the result of systemic problem solving. As we move forward we must remember that even language itself is communication technology: the creation of a system of sounds correlated with ideas. The systematic treatment of those sounds such that they are imbued with meaning as representation of ideas is technology. Writing is the systemic application of symbols to those sounds, gaining humankind the ability to record ideas, and a step further to proliferate those ideas.

Remembering this intertwined relationship of communication as technology, and technology that facilitates communication and in turn facilitates further developments in both, is important as we progress. As complex societies and thus systems of law, have evolved, they have done so both in response to, and facilitated by, technological advancement. They are component parts of systems that have evolved over time, moving, by the broader view, toward systems of greater and greater refinement. All these systems are the output of systemic problem solving at increasing levels of complexity. The march of technological innovation and the evolution of systems of order seem to be a sort of fundamental force. Be it gravity, or the cooperation of bees and ants, this force is an expression of the tendency toward order exhibited at all levels of the universe. While personally I tend toward a positivist view of law, I will grant the natural law theorists the fact that any system chased to its fundamental components seems to end with unidentifiable forces. I disagree with those philosophers that would call this force "morals." In my estimation the concept of 'morals' used in explanations of "natural law" is merely a system by which complicated organisms sense and discuss the complex system that is perception and emotion. A 'moral' only has value insofar as it contributes to communication in the effort to pursue harmony. I hope to continue this abstract discussion in further sections.

####Decentralized Systems Of Communication

Before we begin practical or philosophical exploration of the implications of modern decentralization of technology it is important to establish a baseline understanding of those technologies, their evolution, and more broadly the nature of a decentralized system. The best place to start is perhaps with the antithesis: a centralized system. In each case it will be valuable to look at baseline version of specific technologies I’ve mentioned above, as well as their broader function in the march toward decentralization. Compared to the complications of legal and interpersonal communication dynamics, computer networks are simple. Yet, for their simplicity, they still represent that core interactions that make up all forms of communication: ideas, or "data," sent back and forth. And in computer systems we are able to more clearly see the different arrangements of links and permissions through which information is passed. Those links and permissions are simple in comparison to the complexity of language, etiquette, or the law. In the end they are still all nothing more than systems of parameters. The parameters upon which any party taking part in said communication has agreed, or simply been taught for the sake of facilitating higher orders of complexity in communication. Higher orders of complexity in problem solving.

####Centralized Systems

A “centralized” system is one in which all power is constrained to a central hub. Think of spokes on a wheel. Whether the function is communication, computation, or government, every decision is made by the central point of contact. Each spoke of the wheel, no matter how many there are, must make contact with the master hub, and they are unable to talk to one another directly. Without contact with the main hub the component at the end of that spoke is essentially inert, it has no computational capacity, and does not contain any means of performing functions.

In the computing sense I’ve just described a system that can be visualized by imagining a group of terminals consisting of screens and keyboards. Every terminal is connected to the main hub, and every piece of information input via the keyboard is sent back to the main hub. Similarly, every piece of information displayed on the screen is sent directly from the main hub to that screen. There is no processing and no computation taking place at the terminal itself, it is simply a window into the operation of the master hub through which we can deliver commands. This was the initial state of mass computing. The physical devices were such that a computer the complexity of which I now wear on my wrist filled a room. A centralized system was the only hope to give anyone access to that computing power.

Adding a layer of complexity to expand the notion of a centralized system to systems of authority, or power, the terminal referenced above is powerless. It is capable only of sending and receiving information. It has access to the main hub, but is itself possessed of no authority to make decisions, and is not connected to other terminals. Extrapolating this notion of authority to a centralized system of government, we have monarchy. A system of government in which all political power, all power to make laws, to see to their disposition, and ultimately govern the people, is centralized in one seat, that of the king, emperor, or the like. Removing notions of higher order complexity — that is, the fact the people can talk to one another, as terminals in a centralized system cannot — as far as the structure of the system of government, as a system, is concerned, the people are powerless. Similar to the evolution of systems of computing, early in the evolution of human society monarchy was effective, if not necessary. In essence, with the fresh notion of large scale social order, a central hub of authority, as in computing, is a natural first development, whether within a family, or an empire.

####Decentralized Systems

A decentralized system is one in which power is diffused from the central hub to a series of intermediate hubs. Decision making, or computational load on the central hub is decreased by offloading of tasks to these intermediate hubs. Those intermediate stations are given the power and ability to perform certain functions, or a subset of functions without checking in with the main hub. Here we can envision the spokes of the wheels imaged earlier, multiplied. Now we have a system of multiple wheels, the hub of each connected back to the master hub. That master hub is aware of, and controls the operation of those intermediate hubs, which in turn control the terminals. Still the terminals do not talk to one another, and now they do not talk directly to the central hub, unless passing through and intermediate hub.
	
In the world of computers such systems developed as we were able to shrink the room filling computer mentioned above, while maintaining the same computational capacity. Smaller systems meant the ability to have more of them, in more locations, each with the same computing power as the old central hub. At the same time, the space occupied by the old central hub was now filled with these smaller systems, multiplying the computation power of that central hub. This central hub now had the power to work on exponentially more complex computations, while also paying attention to the distribution of tasks to intermediate stations, those controlling the terminals.
	
To again jump to the more complex application of this decentralized communication paradigm to systems of power and authority: authority now rests with the intermediate hubs, and their mutual communication through the central hub. All authority regarding the functions of a terminal is held by the intermediate hub, and all authority regarding functions of the intermediate hubs as a network is held by the central hub. System-wide the terminals are still not talking to one another directly, and have no authority.
	
The above might sound familiar. The visual evoked is that of a web, which is another term used for the Internet. The Internet is the most readily available, and widely know example of a decentralized system of communication. For the ease of the explanation above I’ve left the central hub in play, but in reality, a decentralized system no longer requires a master hub, and the Internet has none. The function of the central hub is diffused across all intermediate hubs by the introduction of what is, in essence, social order. A system of communication. The central innovation of the internet was not the networking or even computational capacity, but software that allowed the intermediate hubs to coordinate their behavior. As long as those intermediate hubs report to one another the tasks that formerly required the coordination of a central authority, the need for that central authority can be fully dispersed to those intermediate hubs. In essence, the core innovation that gave birth to "the Internet" with an uppercase "I," was governance software, a system of rules, distributed to, and followed by, every intermediate hub. 
	
The governance software, as rudimentary as it is, may be compared to, for example, the United States Code, and its underlying Constitution. At its core absolutely no different than the protocols behind the Internet. The U.S. Code is a set of rules for the cooperation of a massively complicated system of communication and behavior. As you may have been able to track, the United States’ system of government, that which we call "democracy," (although actually a democratic republic,) is a decentralized system. The federal government is at the center, possessing authority over the government of the states the intermediate hubs. Primarily governed by the authority of the states (day-to-day at least) are the people. Naturally the intricacies of the system are more complicated than this, but at its core, and certainly as envisioned by the Founding Fathers, it is a decentralized system of government. Or, as Benjamin Franklin famously said “A Republic… if you can keep it.” Later I will undertake a deeper inspection of US “democracy” but for current purposes it is important merely as an example of a decentralized system. It is a system born of the Founding Fathers’ desire to build from the foundation before them a more perfect system of governing a people than the monarchy they had so recently bucked.
	
As evidenced by its persistence, that system devised by the Founding Fathers of the United States has to date been remarkably effective. Certainly a great deal of this might be attributed to the decentralized nature of the system. Decentralized systems are inherently particularly robust. The Internet itself was developed to be truly decentralized, that is, possessed of no central hub at all, in order to protect the information stored therein: nuclear launch codes, and other “top secret” information essential to the function of the US government. The desire at its inception was that the internet should provide a system by which important information, and the communication of that information would be stable and accessible even in the event that one or even multiple intermediate hubs were literally, physically, destroyed via nuclear attack. But this decentralization also opened up communication possibilities, and expansion of computing power. The establishment of a protocol by which information is shared from hub to hub has allowed those networks to handle increasingly vast quantities of communication, and in turn to solve increasingly complex problems. In the realm of government the diffusion of a degree of power to govern and adapt the rules of government away from a central authority and toward the people is similarly robust, and as I hope to explore further below, results in more effectively establishing the balance between the human desire to be free in our thoughts and actions and the requirement that we sacrifice a measure of freedom in the name of common cooperation.

####Distributed Systems
	
Decentralization is not the endpoint in the evolution of systems of computing, nor communication. We have, only in the last decade, begun to encounter systems of communication that a what one might call purely decentralized. That is, completely and fully without hubs. Here there is no wheel to imagine, only spokes, a system of points, with all points able to communicate with any of the other points. All of these points are able to perform all of the necessary functions related to that network, and the network as a whole is able to keep track of the functions of all of the points. There are no central or intermediate hubs.  
	
If we follow evolution in the realm of computing the decentralization has continued along a predictable path. With computers continuing to shrink it only made sense to now move some of the computational capacity out to the terminals, to let it happen right there where the screen and the input devices are located, and provide that the results of these computations should be reported back to the network. It took place piecemeal as PCs and the internet proliferated, but this progression has not slowed. We continue to build processing power into the devices around us. We use them every day computers, phones, watches, houses and we continue to network those devices together. Here it is important to realize that by “network” we mean not only to physically (or wirelessly as it were) connect these devices, but also write the software by which the communication of these devices is governed. This software is itself decentralized, and in some very specific cases I will discuss, fully distributed.
	
It is only within the last decade that we have crossed the important threshold to the possibility of truly distributed computing. Now the personal devices in the possession of each of us has the computing power to, by itself, solve problems that extend well beyond the needs of the average person. Not only does everyone who owns a smartphone hold in their pocket the equivalent computing power of the old room-sized computers, but they have computing power to spare, and programers and scholars are already able to put that power to work, and have been on some level for years. In an early example of how such a system can be harnessed there is the initiative known as The Great Internet Mersenne Prime Search, (G.I.M.P.S.). This was any early distributed computation effort started in 1996 intended to verify increasingly higher primer numbers. To take part, a user would download a small program onto their computer that would run in the background using only a fraction of the computing capacity of that personal system. A fraction small enough that it would rarely even cause a noticeable change running everyday programs. That fractional amount of computing power was used to process equations, and report the findings back to the rest of the group of systems running the software. With no central hub, this network of computers at one point was estimated to be the largest super computer in the world, by distributing computing tasks, in fractional increments, to millions of users.

An example of a distributed system that most will recognize is Napster, sort of. Napster relied on a central server, which didn’t save files, but which coordinated a master database of files available across the distributed network. Killing this server was how it was eventually shut down. Napster’s progeny plugged this hole. Services such as Limewire and Kazaa were fully decentralized, as BitTorrent is today. Every computer running a BitTorrent client, when a torrent request is initiated, checks, at the speed of light, every other system in the world also running a client. From there that client is able to ask for the file it seeks, and begin receiving the data that comprises that file from all of the other clients with a version of that file at once, at revolutionary speed. The only bottleneck becomes the physical speed at which we can move electrons through a cable. Another example from the headlines is Bitcoin. It is often pitched as a “decentralized” form of currency, as it doesn’t rely on major banks or a national treasury to maintain stability and functionality. In that sense it is decentralized, but truly it is a distributed system of currency. Similar to GIMPS, or BitTorrent, BitCoin derives its stability and “security” from its distribution. There is no central hub to destroy or otherwise manipulate. The master registry of all transactions taking place with BitCoin exist at once on all systems taking part in the “mining” of BitCoin.
	
When it comes to the security of a fully decentralized system robust falls short as a descriptor. A decentralized system, such as the internet, is difficult to physically destroy because there are thousands of hubs. A fully decentralized system, such as BitTorrent is borderline impossible to pick apart. (The most limiting factor is the infrastructure, which is as secure as the Internet itself.) The security derives from an important facet of decentralization which I have already discussed. As computing power has diffused, and computing tasks have been passed down to smaller, more specifically able devices, along with them has gone the aforementioned rules of governance. The brilliance of BitTorrent, just like the brilliance of the Internet before it, is not in the increased computing power, but in the protocol that was proliferated to facilitate communication between devices. In this sense BitTorrent is technology like language is technology: systematic agreement on a standard of communication. That communication facilitated by advancement in physical technology, be they books or computers. Coupled with the proliferation of computing power, we’ve taken a system that could involve many people working at terminals, through a central hub, and diffused that computing power to, literally, billions of devices instead united by common rules of device to device communication. Another way to say this is that each device, to some extent, has a full copy of everything the communication system needs to persist. By eliminating the central hubs we eliminate the points where the system could be shut down with the flip of a switch.

Let's continue my pattern, and take a step backward to greater abstraction. What of authority in a distributed system? Here there is no central hub so there is no direct authority in the sense of a gatekeeper. There is no entity exerting authority to the extent that information or ideas are controlled, or rules are proliferated. The physical system itself does not provide a hierarchy of control and authority. In theory every device on a distributed network is its own master. In theory. In reality they are constrained by the protocols and parameters that allow the system to function. In some sense this means that there is centralized authority in the rules of the system itself. If a BitTorrent client does not adhere to certain communication protocol it is unable to avail itself of the distributed network. This must constitute some form of authority, but more one that is inherent to the system, than possessed by any one entity. And BitTorrent is the perfect example, as there are few standards beyond those I’ve just outlined, and BitTorrent is most widely known for its use in the piracy of intellectual property.
	
At this point, unlike as in previous sections, the discussion of distributed systems and government gets hazy, theoretical, and is the place where we will spend the balance of our inquiry. Executed on a large scale the increase in complexity from one form of government, to the next, more decentralized form is massive. To date there are few examples in the history of humankind of systems of government without at least some form of vaguely centralized authority. At least, nothing on a large scale. At the tribal level there are examples of effective fully distributed forms of governance wherein there is no clear cut leader, but in human history it seems to be centralization that first allowed us to progress toward the possibility of motion once again in the direction of decentralization. Looking further, to the animal kingdom, even the closest we can find to what seem to be a distributed system of communication, that between ants and bees, communities built on communication that borders on apparent telepathy, still often have a center of authority in their queen. But this does not leave the inquiry moot, for the march of systems of technology and communication among humans continues toward further distribution, and further decentralization. As we strive, driven by the universal imperative that I have called technology, toward a more perfect coordinated system of communication, we will need to adapt the systems we have. As I referenced at the outset, younger generations of those to be governed and take part in the government already grumble at its failures to provide the transparency, and cooperation, they see in the technology surrounding them.

[^1]: Culkin, J.M. (1967, March 18). A schoolman’s guide to Marshall McLuhan. Saturday Review, pp. 51-53, 71-72.